We also conducted a split-block design experiment in a controlled-environment facility at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. This facility has rooms where a range of environmental variables, including temperature and day length, can be precisely controlled at a very fine temporal grain (e.g., minutes). We replicated historical and future growing seasons (June 15th to August 29th) in Yellowstone, including three temperature treatments, a historical (1955 to 2005), mid-21st century (2020 to 2050), and late-21st century (2050 to 2080) period. Each temperature block was replicated three times (i.e., three rooms, n = 9). Within each temperature block, we applied five different precipitation treatments, representing wet to dry conditions. Eight 3.81-cm wide by 21-cm deep pots of rhyolite and sedimentary soils were assigned to each precipitation treatment. Pots received either 10 lodgepole pine or 10 Douglas-fir seeds. This yielded four replicate pots per temperature x precipitation x soil x tree species combination. The experiment ran for 75 days. For the first two weeks, soils were kept saturated to represent snow melt, and for the remainder of the experiment, precipitation treatments were implemented. After one month, soil cores from the three replicates of each temperature block were condensed into one room per temperature block, due to cost constraints.

Temperature: Temperature treatments were developed based on gridded downscaled projections of current and future conditions from the IPCC 5th report (IPCC 2014). We selected the same GCMs used in the field experiment (albeit, the next generation). GCMs were forced with the representative concentration pathway 8.5 scenario, which assumes continued emissions increases through 2100 (Smith et al. 2016). GCMs were downscaled to 6-km resolution using the Multivariate Adaptive Constructed Analogs approach (Abatzoglou and Brown 2012) (http://climate.nkn.uidaho.edu/MACA/index.php). We selected historical and future climate data for grid cells that corresponded to our three high-elevation field experiment sites. Preliminary analysis suggested variance in temperature was orders of magnitude greater over time (i.e., year-to-year) than across space (between the three grid cells), so the three grid cells were pooled together.

For the pooled grid cells, we calculated the median daily minimum and maximum temperature between June 15th and August 29th for each period (Appendix S1). We then used linear trends fit to median minimum and maximum daily temperatures as the minimum and maximum daily temperatures for each temperature treatment. Pots of soil in the controlled-environment experiment were not insulated by surrounding soils like the pvc cores in the field experiment. Thus, soil temperature more closely tracked air temperature and were on average a few degrees cooler than in the field experiment. This allowed us to quantify how warming influenced seedling establishment under relatively cool conditions, as might be experienced at the high-elevation edge of species’ ranges.

Timing of daily minimum and maximum temperatures was calculated using hourly temperature data recorded at a SNOTEL weather station (Thumb Divide-816) located near our high-elevation field experiment sites in Yellowstone between 1996 and 2015, the period for which data were available (https://www.wcc.nrcs.usda.gov/snow/). During the growing season, minimum and maximum daily temperatures most frequently occurred at 4:00 am and 1:00 pm, respectively. We set our minimum and maximum daily temperatures to occur at these times each day and linearly interpolated temperature between them. Day length was set using data from the Astronomical Applications Dept. of the U.S. Naval Observatory for West Yellowstone.

Precipitation: The sum of growing season precipitation varied little between historical and future growing seasons in the gridded climate dataset. We set experimental precipitation treatments by calculating the median (95.7 mm), 40th (81.1 mm), 30th (76.9 mm), 20th (72.2 mm) and 10th (53.7 mm) percentile growing season precipitation totals during the historical climate period. 

The number of precipitation events per growing season was determined using the instrumental SNOTEL record that we used for the timing of daily temperatures because precipitation was linearly apportioned among days in the gridded climate data (Livneh et al. 2013). We first calculated the median number of rain events (n = 14) during growing seasons between 1988 and 2015. We then divided the sum of growing season precipitation by 14 and scheduled watering events to occur evenly spaced through the growing season (every 4-5 days). We multiplied the per event precipitation amount in cm by the area of our pots (11.4 cm2) to calculate how much water each pot should receive in ml. Each pot received 4.3 ml, 5.8 ml, 6.2 ml, 6.6 ml, or 7.8 ml of water with a pipette every four to five days. 

Soils and seeds: Rhyolite and sedimentary soils were collected from the same recent fires where soil cores were taken for the field experiment. We harvested the top 20 cm of soil, passed it through a 2-mm sieve, and transported it to Madison, WI in sealed 5-gallon buckets. Soils were kept cool until used in the experiment. The seeds used in this experiment were purchased from the US Forest Service and collected in Greater Yellowstone. We selected seed stocks that were harvested at the same elevation as our low-elevation field experiment sites.

Experimental measurements: During the experiment, soil temperature and water potential were measured in one pot per temperature x soil-type combination for three of the five precipitation levels (driest, middle, wettest) every hour using Campbell Scientific 229 heat dissipation units. We measured soil water potential rather than volumetric soil moisture (as in the field experiment) to better characterize water balance that was physiologically meaningful to the tree seedlings. The sensors measured soil water potential down to – 2 Mpa, which is lower than the threshold for lodgepole pine seedling emergence (Petrie et al. 2016). Thus, some observations that were below -2 Mpa late in the experiment were not used to characterize moisture conditions. Every two to three weeks, we tallied seedling emergence and mortality and measured seedling heights. We measured emergence instead of establishment, because we could visit the controlled-environment facility frequently. At the end of the experiment, needles were counted, and root and shoot lengths were measured. Seedlings were then dried at 60 degC for 24 hours, and root and shoot biomass were measured.
