Meta-analysis and research synthesis were used to analyze U.S. waste characterization data. Waste characterization data from state, county, and regional studies were found using the Google search engine. Primary search terms were waste sort, waste characterization study, and waste composition study. The search also targeted websites listing waste characterization studies.30,31After an initial selection using search terms and study titles, the methodology and results sections were carefully reviewed to determine if studies met inclusion criteria. Selection criteria for inclusion were developed prior to choosing or discarding studies. All studies not meeting all selection criteria were excluded and the reason for exclusion was noted). Inclusion criteria were(1) followed general principles and methods outlined by ASTM for waste characterization studies (ASTM D 5231-08); (2) contained compositional data for food waste based on weight and enabled percentage(by wet weight) of food waste to be determined; (3) performed at a municipal scale (e.g., city, county, state); (4) performed post-recovery of recyclables; (5) involved sampling at the disposal (or transfer) site rather than at the generation point;(6) examined only municipal solid waste or MSW (residential, institutional, and commercial waste); (7) involved primarily manual sorting of samples (not visual); (8) provided confidence intervals and sample sizes; (9) used a standard, comparable definition of food waste; (10) conducted in the U.S; and (11) conducted between 1989 and 2013, thus capturing a 25 year span.

An important selection criterion was that studies focused only on MSW. Some food waste and loss are not included as MSW food waste. More specifically, industrial food loss (agriculture, production and processing) is not considered MSW, and it is generally not managed with MSW. The industrial sector faces particular circumstances and regulations making industrial food waste management different than food waste in MSW. Considerable amounts of industrial food waste are diverted from disposal; one estimate was 95% of food waste from manufacturers did not go to landfills, with 70% used for animalfeed.32MSW food waste data do not include wastes that escape through pathways other than MSW systems, such as home composting, food disposals, or food fed to animals. This approach is consistent with how USEPA quantifies U.S.MSW.18The present analysis includes avoidable (food that was edible prior to disposal), possibly avoidable (food that some people eat and others do not), and unavoidable (food that is not edible under normal circumstances) food waste.

Information coded for each study were: study ID number, name, author(s), year, publication date, scale (county, state, region), state, region, population of study area, sectors included(all MSW, residential, commercial/institutional), residential type (single−family, multifamily), geographical classification(urban, rural), sampling season, number of samples, average sample weight, and the proportion of food waste as determined from sampling and its 95% confidence interval. Data on waste shed disposal quantities were recorded as reported in each individual study. These tonnages allow for the determination of the total food waste disposed annually in the waste shed and for the calculation of pounds of food waste disposed per person per day.
