<emphasis>Study Sites </emphasis>

We sampled 23 sites on three independent latitudinal gradients; each of which spanned ~10 degrees of latitude and represented a different major ecoregion of the Great Plains. The West gradient was characterized by shortgrass prairie and desert grassland, the Middle gradient was largely mixed-grass prairie, and the East gradient was tallgrass prairie. Our latitudinal range was comparable to that of similar studies (e.g., Andrew and Huhges 2004; Adams and Zhang 2009; Kim 2014) and encompassed substantial climate variation, with mean annual temperature ranging ~10 C north-south and precipitation varying ~1000 mm east-west (Shafer et al. 2014). Specifically, our study spanned a gradient of 197 mm to 1001 mm in 30-year normal mean annual precipitation (MAP) and 2341C to 5837C in mean growing degree days (GDD). We sampled a total of 23 sites: 11 in the West, and six each in the Middle and East (see Fig. 1). At the sites CPR, HAR, HPG, KNZ, and SEV, we sampled a second location within the same landscape from controls plots of an ongoing experiment (EDGE; http://edge.biology.colostate.edu/index.html; Appendix Table S1). Most sites occurred in national or local preserves that had not been grazed by large vertebrate herbivores. However, sites CAD and DMT were likely grazed by cattle, although we sampled from locations that had no evidence of recent grazing so that no herbivory estimates included cattle damage. Some damage observed in our survey may have been caused by small rodents or other small vertebrates. 

<emphasis>Focal Plant Species</emphasis>

We sampled five perennial C4 grasses: blue grama (Boutelou gracilis) and buffalograss (B. dactyloides; formerly genus Buchloë), both ubiquitous in shortgrass prairie; black grama (B. eriopoda), which dominates desert grasslands; big bluestem (Andropogon gerardii), an abundant species in tallgrass prairie; and little bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium), which is common in both tallgrass and mixed-grass prairies. B. gracilis and S. scoparium were the most widely sampled. 

<emphasis>Latitudinal Survey</emphasis>

During summer 2015, at each site, we sampled twelve individual plants per species. We closely examined two haphazardly chosen live, fully expanded leaves per individual. Because all species were not present at every site, the number of sites sampled varied among plant species (see Table S1, Appendix). Individuals were selected as the nearest plant every 10 m along five transects spaced at 10 m intervals (within a sampling area of ~50 m x 50 m). For most sites, we used a separate sampling grid for each grass species due to non-overlapping species distributions at the local scale. Following standard methods for herbivory assessment (Pennings et al. 2007), we visually estimated the percentage of leaf area missing from each of two randomly selected leaves per plant and we focused our sampling attention on chewing insect damage. Instead of binning damage estimates into categories (e.g., 11-25%), as in Pennings et al. (2007), values were recorded as continuous variation from 0-50% (generally scored to the nearest 5%) or scored as 75% damage for all leaves damaged by >50%. While this latter category may have slightly inflated our estimates, only 18 leaves of 1618 were scored as >50% damaged. Maximum damage observed was ~100%. A consequence of sampling on a large geographic scale at similar phenology was that multiple observers were required for data collection. Prior to sampling, all observers calibrated their estimates of herbivore damage in the field to maintain consistency. For analysis, we averaged herbivore damage between the two leaves per individual plant. 

To help control for phenological differences among plants at different latitudes, we sampled all sites at similar growing degree days (GDD) based on the 30-year climate average (2680 &#177; 418 s.d. degree days, using a 0 C base). This ensured that leaves from different sites were sampled at the same relative age. Sample dates appear in Table S1 in the Appendix.
Per field observations, grasshoppers were a dominant component of the insect herbivore community in our system. Grasshoppers can experience periodic outbreaks and vary greatly in population size over time (Tscharntke and Greiler 1995); thus, it is possible that results obtained during another year might differ from our study. We focused sampling effort on coverage of a large geographic area at the expense of collecting data over multiple timepoints. However, we had no indications that herbivore abundance was anomalous in 2015. For the two sites for which we had grasshopper count data, abundance during 2015 was within 12-13% of the long-term mean. At the Sevilleta Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) black grama site in 2015, average grasshoppers per ha was 309 &#177; 23.2 s.e., and the long-term (1992-2015) average was 276 &#177; 7.5 s.e. At the Sevilleta LTER blue grama site, mean grasshopper density per ha in 2015 was 357 &#177; 8.9 s.e. and the long-term (2002-2015) mean was 411 = &#177; 28.7 s.e. 

<emphasis>Abiotic Factors</emphasis>

We examined six abiotic factors as possible correlates of herbivory. Two were climatic: growing season precipitation and cumulative GDD. The other four were edaphic: soil nitrogen (as nitrate), phosphorous, pH, and organic matter (SOM). For precipitation and GDD, we defined the growing season as March through October. We used a baseline temperature of 0 C for GDD, as is typical for perennial grasses (Henebry 2013). We created climate windows for each factor over three separate time series, allowing us to determine whether variation in herbivory was best explained by current, short-, or long-term climate data. We used the year of field sampling (2015), the average of the three most recent years (2013-2015), or the 30-year average (including 2015). We extracted climate data at the 800m spatial resolution using the PRISM database (PRISM Climate Group 2016). The other four abiotic factors were related to edaphic conditions: nitrogen (as nitrate), phosphorous, pH, and soil organic matter (SOM). We collected soil samples in situ, taking 10-20g from beneath each plant. Samples were combined to obtain a single value per edaphic factor for each species x site combination. Soil phosphorous and pH were determined using protocols in Robertson et al. (1999). SOM was determined using the loss on ignition method by Zhang and Wang (2014). Soil ammonium and nitrate were determined calorimetrically using the Lachat Autoanalyzer QuikChem method 12-107-06-1-A and 12-107-04-1-F (Loveland, CO).

<emphasis>Plant Traits</emphasis>

We assessed specific leaf area (SLA) and specific root length (SRL) as possible correlates of herbivory. SLA and SRL are above- and belowground indicators of resource acquisition trade-offs (Pérez-Harguindeguy et al. 2013) but are not typically examined in studies of latitudinal variation in foliar herbivory; high SLA and SRL indicate high resource acquisition investment and low tissue longevity (Reich et al. 1992). Traits were measured on the same individuals sampled in the latitudinal survey following published protocols (Pérez-Harguindeguy et al. 2013). Whole live plants were pressed in the field immediately after herbivore damage assessments and two leaves were used for measurement per individual. For SLA, we rehydrated the dried leaves that had been stored in a plant press by placing individual leaf samples in separate, sealed petri dishes with ~100 mL of water. Samples were stored at room temperature during rehydration period (~48 hours). Rehydrated leaves were scanned and digitized for total area (cm&#x00B2;) using WinFOLIA (Regent Instruments Inc., Canada). After measuring leaf area, leaves were oven-dried at 65 C for ~48 h, then weighed for mass. SLA was calculated as rehydrated leaf area divided by leaf mass (cm&#x00B2;/g). Literature suggests that measuring SLA for live plants is preferred (Tomaszewski and Górzkowska 2016), but this was not feasible in our study due to the sampling schedule required to collect data at numerous sites over a large geographic area and control for phenology. For SRL, a subsample of fine roots (ca. 10) from each individual (12 in total) from the field collections were dug up then stored in 50% ethanol. For imaging, roots were submerged in a small amount of DI water in a clear plastic tray with individual roots teased apart. Units of total root length were determined using WinRHIZO (Regent Instruments Inc., Canada). After imaging, roots were oven-dried at 65 C for ~48 h, then weighed for specific mass. SRL was calculated as total root length divided by mass (cm/g).
