This is the data archive for the corresponding publication with the same title (doi: 0.1007/s10661-020-08733-0). The vernal transition represents the seasonal transition to spring, occurring as temperatures rise at the end of winter. With rapid snowmelt, microbial community turnover, and accelerated nutrient cycling, this is a critical but relatively under-studied period of ecosystem function. We conducted a study over two consecutive winters (2015-2016) at the Bear Brook Watershed in Maine to examine how changing winter conditions (warming winters, reduced snow accumulation) altered soil nitrogen availability and stream N export during winter and the vernal transition, and how these patterns were influenced by ecosystem N status (N-enriched vs. N-limited). Of the two study years, 2016 had a warmer winter with substantially less snow accumulation and a discontinuous snowpack — and as a result, had a longer vernal transition and a snowpack that thawed before the vernal transition began. Across both years, snowmelt triggered a transition, signaled by increased ammonium concentrations in soil, decreased soil nitrate concentrations due to flushing by meltwater, and increased stream nitrate exports. Despite the contrasting winter conditions, both years showed similar patterns in N availability and export, differing only in the timing of these transitions. The vernal transition has conventionally been considered a critical period for biogeochemical cycling, because the associated snowmelt event triggers physicochemical and biochemical changes in soil systems. This was consistent with our results in 2015, but our data for 2016 show that this may not always hold true, and instead, that warmer, low-snow winters may demonstrate a temporal asynchrony between snowmelt and the vernal transition. We also show that ecosystem N status is a strong driver of the seasonal N pattern, and the interaction of N status and changing climate must be further investigated to understand ecosystem function under our current predicted trajectory of warming winters, declining snowfall, and winter thaw events. 