To determine how mature buffel grass affects water stress in palo verde seedlings, we planted 24 scarified palo verde seeds in each of 18 large pots (approx. 30 x 60 cm, and 15 cm deep) containing soil from the Tucson Mountains outside the greenhouse at the University of Arizona in August, 2013. Six of the pots contained mature tussocks of invasive grass transplanted from the Tucson Mountains. Six other pots received mature individuals of the native shrub triangle-leaf bursage (Ambrosia deltoidea), which is a common ground cover of similar height and diameter to the invasive grass. The final six tubs had no adult plant. Tubs were arranged randomly within spatial blocks of equal numbers of adult plant types. Supplemental water (4 s daily from a hose, 5 d/week) was provided throughout the five-week experiment to provide conditions suitable for seedling establishment. Temperatures during the experiment ranged from 19degree to 42degreeC, with 10-94% relative humidity. We harvested the seedlings and then dried them for 3 d at 60degreeC before weighing them and grinding them for stable isotope analysis.  

Whole palo verde seedlings were homogenized with a ball mill so their tissue could be uniformly sampled. The University of Arizona's Environmental Isotope Laboratory measured δ13C and δ15N of the seedlings on a continuous-flow gas-ratio mass spectrometer (Finnigan Delta PlusXL) coupled to an elemental analyzer (Costech). Samples were combusted in the elemental analyzer.  Standardization is based on acetanilide for elemental concentration, NBS-22 and USGS-24 for δ13C. Precision is better than ± 0.10 for delta13C based on repeated internal standards. 

We then conducted a second greenhouse pot experiment to determine whether seedlings of buffel grass induce the same mortality and water stress in palo verde seedlings as the mature plants did. In April, 2015, we germinated 32 scarified palo verde seeds each in a 4-in pot with 2-8 week-old buffel grass seedlings. In addition, we germinated 32 seeds each with a 2-8 week old conspecific as a positive control, and an additional 32 seeds with no competitor in the pot as negative controls, for a total of 96 focal seedlings. Each pot received 50 ml tap water three days a week. A spatially blocked design ensured treatment levels were all present in all areas of the greenhouse work tables. Temperatures inside the greenhouse ranged from 23-44oC, with 16-60% relative humidity. We harvested seedlings after 30 days, placed them in the drying oven at 60oC for at least two days before weighing them. We also sampled the soil in 16-17 pots of each treatment level (total of 50) to determine whether pH differed between seedling types. To measure pH in soil, 5 g soil was mixed with 10 ml de-ionized water, and shaken for 15 minutes. After the soil had settled for 30 minutes, a VWR SympHony SB20 was used to measure the pH, and rinsed with de-ionized water between samples.
