A full factorial combination of large herbivore exclusion via fencing ('control' or 'fenced') and addition of nutrients ('control' or 'all nutrients') was applied to 5 x 5 m plots at 58 sites spanning 6 continents as part of the Nutrient Network experimental collaboration (www.nutnet.org). Most sites had three replicate blocks, and all sites had collected one year of pre-treatment data and 2-10 consecutive years of post-treatment data. All sites were located in the herbaceous vegetation ('grassland') representative of the region. 

Treatments. Experimental design and treatments are detailed in www.nutnet.org. Nutrient treatments ('NPK') received: 10 g N m-2 yr-1 as time-release urea [(NH2)2CO], 10 g P m-2 yr-1 as triple-super phosphate, [Ca(H2PO4)2], 10 g K m-2 yr-1 as potassium sulfate [K2SO4] and 100 g m-2 of a micronutrient mix of Fe (15%), S (14%), Mg (1.5%), Mn (2.5%), Cu (1%), Zn (1%), B (0.2%), and Mo (0.05%). Macronutrients (N, P, and K) were applied annually; micronutrients were applied once at the start of the experiment (year 1). 

Caging treatments ('fence') were 180 cm tall. The lower 90 cm was surrounded by 1 cm woven wire mesh with a 30 cm outward-facing flange stapled to the ground to exclude digging animals (e.g., rabbits, voles), though not fully subterranean ones (e.g., gophers, moles). The upper 90 cm had three evenly spaced barbless wires to restrict larger vertebrate access (e.g. bison, elk, reindeer, or kangaroos). A few deviated from this fence design. While all sites had wild herbivore community (e.g. a mix of rodents, lagomorphs, ungulates, marsupials, etc), domestic livestock (e.g., sheep, yak, goat, cattle) were present at 10 sites, allowing us to compare herbivore effects at sites with managed herds.

Vegetation sampling. We analyzed annual peak season live biomass by measuring all aboveground biomass of all plants rooted within two 0.1 m2 (10 x 100 cm) strips in each experimental plot. Clipped vegetation was separated into live and dead components, dried at 60oC for 48 hrs, and weighed to the nearest 0.01 g. We collected all leaves and current year's woody growth from shrubs and sub-shrubs occurring in plots. We visually estimated the percent cover of each species to the nearest 1% in a randomly designated, but permanently marked, 1 x 1 m subplot within each 25 m2 plot to quantify species richness and composition. 

Herbivory. We quantified potential vertebrate herbivore impact in two ways. First, we used a published empirical metric of herbivore impact intensity and frequency (herbivore index). In brief, all herbivore species that consume grassland biomass throughout the year were documented by the PI at each site (> 2 kg), and PIs assigned an importance value for each species that reflected the impact or frequency of encounter, from 1 (present, but low impact and frequency) to 5 (high impact and frequency). An index value was calculated for each site as the sum of herbivore importance values for all herbivores. This empirical herbivore index, based on a standardized rubric completed for each site, accounts for site-level variation in herbivore abundance and diversity, integrated across seasons and years. Second, we extracted the modeled terrestrial potential wild grazer biomass from The large mean body size of mammalian herbivores explains the productivity paradox during the Last Glacial Maximum, (Zhu et al. 2018) (modeled herbivore biomass) using site-level latitude and longitude values. We included the model-estimated value of herbivore biomass for each site location as a second standardized metric of potential herbivore impact among our experimental sites. While each of these provides information about potential and actual grazing intensity, neither is a direct site- or treatment-scale measure. Finally, although studies in some grasslands have shown arthropods can control plant biomass, we did not include insect herbivory in this study because previous work in this experiment suggests that arthropods increase in biomass with increasing plant biomass, but they do not strongly suppress plant biomass in any of the treatments. Thus, we focus here on the impacts of fences – and vertebrate herbivory – because evidence suggests that invertebrate herbivores are impacted by the treatments but have little overall effect on the treatments.

Soils. We collected two 2.5 cm diameter by 10 cm depth soil cores, free of litter and vegetation, from each plot prior to initiation of the experiment (Year 0 – Y0). We composited cores from each plot, homogenized through a 2mm sieve, air dried, and assayed for %N and %C using dry combustion GC analysis (COSTECH ESC 4010 Element Analyzer, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, USA) and also assayed for soil phosphorus, potassium, and micronutrients, soil pH, organic matter, and texture (A&L Analytical Laboratory, Memphis, TN, USA). Because the site-scale correlation between the ambient soil %N and %C was high (0.96, P < 0.001), we included %N in our models.

Climate. We characterized site-level climate and seasonality over 10-30 year timespans using the WorldClim database (version 1.4; http://www.worldclim.org/bioclim) associated to sites via latitude and longitude. We included mean annual temperature (oC; ‘BIO1' in the WorldClim database), mean annual precipitation (mm per year; BIO12), precipitation variability (coefficient of variation in precipitation among months; BIO15), rainfall-potential evapotranspiration (mm per month, PET data from CGIAR), temperature variability (standard deviation of temperature among months; BIO4), and mean precipitation in the warmest quarter (mm; BIO18).

Atmospheric Nitrogen Deposition. We characterized site-level atmospheric nitrogen input using modeled N-deposition (kg N ha-1 y-1) associated with study sites via latitude and longitude. Model input included measurements and future projections using a global three-dimensional chemistry-transport model TM3, http://daac.ornl.gov/. Because our study sites span continents, the 5-degree longitude by 3.75-degree latitude model and output grid resolution (50×50 km sub-grids) were sufficient to differentiate N-deposition rates among sites.

