Methods copied from research article:
https://doi.org/10.1890/15-0734.1

Site description

The study took place within 12 landscapes at the Savannah River Site, an 800 km2 National Environmental Research Park in South Carolina, USA (33.20 N, 81.40 W). Six experimental landscapes were established in 1999-2000 and two in 2007 to investigate the effectiveness of corridors in promoting dispersal in fragmented landscapes (Tewksbury et al. 2002). These landscapes were created by clearing mature plantation pine forest and followed by a low intensity, prescribed fire. The resulting clearings are undergoing restoration to longleaf pine savannas through continued implementation of prescribed fires on a 2-3 yr rotation, planting of low densities of longleaf pine (Pinus palustris), and removal of deciduous trees. Within each experimental landscape, we worked in two 100 x 100 m fragments connected by a 150 m long x 25 m wide habitat corridor. Four unfragmented landscapes (26-50 ha) were created between 2005 and 2010 by clearing mature pine forests, burning the clearings, and planting either longleaf or longleaf and loblolly (Pinus taeda) seedlings. Although generally younger than our connected landscapes, these unfragmented landscapes contain many of the same plant species and are structurally similar to the connected landscapes. All landscapes were separated by at least 1.5 km to minimize the chance of seeds dispersing between them.

Species

We investigated seed dispersal in connected and unfragmented landscapes for two wind- and two bird-dispersed plant species that are native and common in our study sites (Radford et al. 1968, Kilgo and Blake 2005). The wind-dispersed species, Eupatorium compositifolium and Eupatorium glaucescens (formerly Eupatorium cuneifolium; Asteraceae), are herbaceous perennials that grow to approximately 1 m in height (Radford et al. 1968, nomenclature follows Weakly 2012). Seeds mature and are dispersed from September to November for E. compositifolium, and from July to October for E. glaucescens (Radford et al. 1968). The bird-dispersed species, Morella cerifera (formerly Myrica cerifera; Myricaceae) and Rhus copallina (Anacardiaceae), ripen fruits from August to October and from August to September, respectively (Radford et al. 1968). The fruits provide food mainly for wintering birds in the region, and are primarily dispersed by Eastern Bluebirds (Sialia sialis) and Eastern Phoebes (Sayornis phoebe) (McCarty et al. 2002, Levey et al. 2005). Morella cerifera is an evergreen shrub that typically grows to approximately 3 m tall at the study site. Rhus copallina is a deciduous shrub that rarely exceeds 2 m.

Seed marking

We marked seeds of all species by spraying aboveground inflorescences of reproductive individuals with a solution of distilled water and 15N ammonium nitrate (99.9 atom %; Icon Isotopes, Summit, New Jersey, USA). Bird-dispersed plants were sprayed with a solution of 0.125 g/L (Carlo et al. 2009); wind-dispersed plants were sprayed with a solution of 0.25 g/L. To lower surface tension and improve contact to plant tissue, one drop of Tween20 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, USA) was added to each liter of solution. Plants were sprayed using a handheld pump sprayer equipped with a fine mist nozzle. Each plant was sprayed until all flower petals were moist. Flowers were sprayed in the mornings between 6:30 h and 10:00 h to minimize evaporation of the solution and ensure absorption before afternoon rains. In connected landscapes, we sprayed all individuals in the center 80 m x 80 m of one of the two fragments. Near the center of unfragmented landscapes, we sprayed all individuals within a circle of equal area to the sprayed area in the connected fragments (45.14 m radius). E. compositifolium was sprayed eight times (September - November 2012), E. glaucescens was sprayed 14 times (August - September 2012), M. cerifera was sprayed six times (March - June 2012), and R. copallina was sprayed six times (September - October 2012). Species were sprayed different numbers of times because individuals varied in flowering phenology within populations of single species. Our goal was to ensure that all flowers on all individuals were sprayed at least three times. Additional M. cerifera and R. copallina individuals were sprayed at remote locations (>1.8 km from the closest experimental landscape) to supplement naturally occurring populations in both types of landscapes. Branches of remote M. cerifera plants that bore isotope-marked fruits were cut in December 2012 and attached to PVC poles in the center of the sprayed areas. Each of the 12 landscapes was supplemented with ~36 000 M. cerifera fruits. Approximately 6,000 fruits were harvested from supplemental R. copallina plants in December 2012 and equally divided among one unfragmented landscape and three connected landscapes that had low numbers of naturally occurring R. copallina plants. At each of these four landscapes, the supplemental fruits were placed in feeders and attached to the same PVC poles as the branches with M. cerifera fruits.

Seed sampling

Dispersed seeds of all species were sampled with 1,788 seed traps, 125 in each connected landscape and 197 in each unfragmented landscape. Each seed trap consisted of two semi-circle fabric funnels with a total sampling area of 1 m2. The top opening was attached to a wire ring to keep the funnels open. Two plastic baffles were constructed in an "X" pattern across the opening and attached to the wire ring. The purpose of the baffles was to redirect wind into the funnel and to serve as perches for seed-dispersing birds. Each seed trap was mounted on top of a 3 m tall PVC pole, with the base of both funnels anchored to the pole to prevent wind from turning the funnels inside out. In both landscape types, the PVC poles with seed traps were mounted on rebar at distances of 5 m, 10 m, 50 m, 100 m, and 200 m from the outside perimeter of the sprayed area. In connected landscapes, the seed traps at 5 m and 10 m distances were located in the sprayed fragments, and those at distances of 50 m and 100 m were located in the corridor. The farthest sampling distances in connected landscapes were represented by seed traps established along five parallel transects equally distributed at 160 m, 180 m, 200 m, 220 m, and 240 m in the connected fragments. We pooled samples from these five distances into a single distance category, 200 m, in our analyses, because the transect length available for traps at these distances was limited to 100 m (the width of a fragment) and the sampling effort within a single 100 m transect proved to be insufficient for the low seed arrival probability at these distances. Seed traps were equidistant from each other within a distance category and deployment ended at forest edges. We increased the number of seed traps with increasing distance to maintain similar sampling effort at each distance (Nathan et al. 2003, Carlo et al. 2013). Seed traps were deployed from August 2012 until September 2012 and left in the field until March 2013. To minimize damage to seeds and accumulation of plant litter in traps, seed traps were emptied twice, in November 2012 and March 2013. A few (<1%) bird-dispersed seeds in traps showed minor signs of fungal infestation, but this did not influence our ability to identify them to species. Further, it cannot be ruled out that some wind-dispersed seeds lost their pappus in the traps and that those seeds and others may have been discarded with accumulated plant litter in the traps. This, however, should have equally affected both species of wind-dispersed seeds in our study. We found no evidence of granivorous animals such as birds and ants removing seeds from the traps.

Seed preparation and mass spectrometry analyses

Seeds collected from traps were sorted and identified to species. For each landscape, seeds of each species were combined by distance category. Only fully mature seeds were used in analyses. Because it was impractical to test for presence of 15N in thousands of individual seeds, we analyzed seeds in batches of up to 100 seeds of a single species collected from the same distance within a given landscape (Carlo et al. 2013). Seeds within a batch were thoroughly homogenized using a Wig-L-Bug grinder (Dentsply, Elgin, Illinois, USA) for wind-dispersed species and a Mixer Mill MM200 (Retsch, Haan, Germany) for bird-dispersed species. After grinding a batch, all equipment in contact with seed material was washed twice with distilled water and soap, rinsed a third time with distilled water, wiped, given a final rinse with acetone, and allowed to air dry. We then weighed samples of each batch and wrapped them in tin cups (5 x 9 mm, CE Elantech, Lakewood, New Jersey, USA) for mass spectrometry. Whenever possible, sample masses of approximately 9 mg were used for each batch (Carlo et al. 2013). If the ground seed material was less than 9 mg, the maximum possible weight was used (0.4-9.0 mg). All samples were analyzed for 15N atom % using an elemental analyzer (Costech ECS 4010 CHNSO Analyzer; Costech Analytical Technologies, Valencia, California, USA) connected to a Thermo Scientific ConFlo IV Universal interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA), which served as an inlet to the continuous flow isotope ratio mass spectrometer (Thermo Delta V Advantage; Thermo Fisher). Analyses were performed at the Laboratory for Isotopes and Metals in the Environment at Pennsylvania State University (State College, Pennsylvania, USA).
Statistical analyses

Estimating number of 15N-marked seeds in traps.

We estimated the number of marked seeds in a given batch using a two-source mixing model (Carlo et al. 2013), because the percentage of 15N atoms (15N atom %) in a batch of marked and unmarked seeds depends on both the proportion of marked seeds in the batch and the 15N atom % of each seed. Thus the distribution of 15N values of a batch of nm (marked) and nu (unmarked) seeds is the convolution of a total of nm + nu distributions, with the distribution of marked values represented nm times and that of unmarked values represented nu times. To establish 15N atom % distributions for marked and unmarked seeds for each species, we analyzed seeds collected directly from marked plants in the sprayed areas of each landscape, and seeds collected from control plants in unsprayed areas of the experimental landscapes. For each species, we tried to fit a single Gaussian distribution to the 15N atom % data of marked and unmarked control seeds. In all instances, however, a simple distribution was not appropriate for the data and hence, a combination of two Gaussian distributions was fitted to the data. Depending on availability, 20-44 unmarked and 20-37 marked seeds were used to fit the distributions. To be conservative, we left-truncated the fitted distributions for marked seeds to a 15N atom % value 0.01 larger than the highest 15N atom % value of the corresponding unmarked seeds to avoid any overlap. For example, the range of 15N atom % found in unmarked seeds of M. cerifera varied from 0.357 to 0.371, so we truncated the distributions of marked seeds to have values larger than 0.372. The model searched for the combination of marked and unmarked seeds that maximized the likelihood of observing a 15N atom % value similar to the one observed in the batch. The distribution of 15N atom % from a particular batch of marked and unmarked seeds was estimated by first simulating 106 seed mixtures by sampling from the combinations of distributions fitted to the marked and unmarked control seeds. An empirical cumulative distribution function was then computed from these simulated values, using the function ecdf in R 3.0.3 (R Development Core Team 2014). From this empirical cumulative distribution we computed the likelihood of the observed 15N atom %. The estimated number of marked seeds in a batch corresponds to the number of marked seeds that maximize the likelihood.

Fitting dispersal kernels.

For comparability of sampled marked seeds within and among sites, we standardized the estimated number of marked seeds for sampling days (number of traps x days from deployment to seed collection) and for total area of the distance band (length of circumference x diameter of seed trap [~1 m]) at each distance per site. To do so, we first divided the estimated number of marked seeds sampled at a distance by the number of sampling days at the distance, resulting in the number of marked seeds caught per m2 (i.e., per trap) per day, which represents the daily seed trap capture rate. We multiplied this rate by the total area of the distance band, which accounts for the decreasing probability for seeds to land in a seed trap with increasing distance, creating a daily seed rain rate for each distance band. For example, in an unfragmented landscape, the daily seed trap capture rate of marked seeds from M. cerifera in the first ring of traps 5 m from the source plants was 0.02 seeds per day, and one seed trap sampled 0.32% of the total area within this 4.5-5.5 m band. By multiplying the daily seed trap capture rate by the total area of the corresponding distance band, we determined the daily seed deposition rate to the distance band, which corresponds to seven seeds in the example above. This calculation provides the seed number for 100% of the area at each distance band and allows standardized comparison of dispersed marked seeds between distance bands. Based on the standardized numbers of marked seeds at each distance, survival analyses were used to construct dispersal kernels (Jansen et al. 2012). Every marked seed was treated as an event and observed dispersal distances were treated as failure times. Kaplan-Meier survival analyses were used to calculate the survivorship function for each species and landscape (cf. Jansen et al. 2008, 2012, Hirsch et al. 2012) using the function survfit (Therneau 2014) in R 3.0.3 (R Development Core Team 2014). Dispersal data were pooled across landscapes of the same type because of low numbers of marked seeds in seed traps, especially at long distances. For each species, we tested if there was a difference between survival curves in the two landscapes with the function survdiff (Therneau 2014), which uses the G-rho family of tests (Harrington and Fleming 1982). We then fitted five commonly-used dispersal distance kernels in their one-dimensional form (i.e., probability density functions of the distribution of dispersal distances; Nathan et al. 2012) to the Kaplan-Meier survivorship functions: (1) exponential, (2) gamma, (3) Gompertz, (4) lognormal, and (5) Weibull. We used the function flexsurvreg (Jackson 2014) to search for parameter values in each of the five probability density functions that maximized the likelihood of the distance to-observation data. We used relative likelihood, and the delta, and weights of Akaike information criteria (AIC; Akaike 1973) to determine which function best fit the observed data.

Long-distance dispersal definition.

Two general approaches are typically used to define LDD (Nathan 2005): (1) The proportional definition, in which LDD events include a small proportion (e.g., 1%) of all dispersed seeds that traveled the farthest, or (2) the absolute definition, in which dispersal events are considered LDD if they exceed a specified distance. In our study, we used the absolute definition because we were interested in movement between fragments that were specific distances apart. We defined LDD events as seeds sampled at 200 m distance from the source because it represents the distance that seeds must travel, to move between connected fragments. We analyzed a total of 6,016 seeds, of which 4,197 came from Eupatorium compositifolium, 491 from Eupatorium glaucescens, 412 from Morella cerifera, and 916 from Rhus copallina. Based on the 15N percentage of the analyzed seed batches, the two-source mixing model inferred the presence of 27 marked seeds for E. compositifolium, 37 marked seeds for E. glaucescens, 195 marked seeds for M. cerifera, and 85 marked seeds for R. copallina. For the two wind-dispersed species, we found no evidence for differences in Kaplan-Meier estimates (i.e., fraction of seeds dispersing to each distance) between connected and unfragmented landscapes. Of the five dispersal kernel functions, the lognormal distribution fit all wind-dispersed Kaplan-Meier estimates best. The median dispersal distance for E. compositifolium was 10 m in connected landscapes and 30 m in unfragmented landscapes (G-rho P = 0.09, df = 1). For E. glaucescens, the median dispersal distance was 10 m for both connected and unfragmented landscapes (G-rho P = 0.54, df = 1). Conversely, dispersal kernels differed significantly between connected and unfragmented landscapes for both of the bird-dispersed species. M. cerifera seeds dispersed further in unfragmented than connected landscapes (median dispersal of 10 m and 100 m, respectively; G-rho P < 0.01). Accordingly, the best fits were the lognormal distribution for connected and the gamma distribution for the unfragmented landscapes. For the second bird-dispersed species, R. copallina, seeds dispersed further in connected than unfragmented landscapes (median dispersal of 200 m and 50 m, respectively; G-rho P < 0.01). The best fits for the Kaplan-Meier estimates were the Gompertz distribution for connected and the lognormal distribution for the unfragmented landscapes.
