Study Site

This study was conducted at Lilley Cornett Woods Appalachian Ecological Research Station (LCW), which contains 102 ha of old-growth forest. Lilley Cornett Woods is a stable mixed mesophytic forest in the Cumberland Plateau region of southeastern Kentucky. With no history of timber harvest, the old-growth forest at LCW has experienced no substantial anthropogenic disturbance with the exception of understory livestock grazing, which ended in the 1950s (Martin 1975). Canopy disturbances in LCW are primarily stochastic (Davis, Chapman, Wu and McEwan 2015) and therefore the distribution of canopy gaps is predicted to be uniform and resultant from endogenous processes. Of the three tracts of old-growth forest at LCW, one tract, "Shop Hollow", currently experiences little disturbance from human recreation (only guided hiking on a narrow, established trail) and features minimal understory vegetation. Shop Hollow features 57 permanent circular sample plots with a diameter of 32 m (800 m2), which were originally established by Martin (1975). Sample plots were stratified by elevation (lower [< 345 m], middle [345–410 m], upper [411–467 m], and ridge [> 467 m]). Data collection occurred at all sample plots free of intersecting streams (N=40).

Amphibian Sampling

This study relied upon visual encounter surveys (VES) to detect species, and therefore all observations resulted from hand captures during standardized searching. 

Each of the N=40 sample plots were visited four times between 15 October and 13 November 2016 from 0800–2000 EST, with no less than five days occurring between visits. Locally, observations of Plethodon salamander activity in the fall season can rival, if not exceed, those of the spring (Baecher and Richter pers. obs., MacGregor per. comm.), and therefore this sample period was chosen as the most representative of true patterns in occurrence and abundance. VES were conducted along a linear 3-m x 32-m transect (96 m2), which intersected the center of each 800-m2 circular sample plot at a randomly chosen bearing between 0deg and 180deg. The bearing of each transect was also randomized during each sequential visit, making the likelihood of sampling the same microhabitat at a given sample plot negligible. In LCW, woodland salamanders are found primarily by searching under natural cover (coarse woody debris [CWD] and rocks) on the forest floor. During VES, all CWD and rocky cover within the 96-m2 transects were flipped, and microhabitats beneath were examined for the presence of salamanders before replacing cover items to their exact position.  

Site Covariates

During each visit, soil moisture was measured with a Pro Check moisture probe (Decagon Devices, Inc.) at five equidistant points along the transect within each sample plot, and therefore estimates were obtained by averaging across transect (N=5) and visit (N=4). Quantification of forest canopy openness was achieved using hemispherical canopy photography (Herbert 1987; Frazer, Lertzman and Trofymow 1997; Baldwin, Calhoun and DeMaynadier 2006). A single photograph of canopy structure was captured prior to leaf off with a 24-megapixel digital single lens reflex camera (Nikon D7100) on automatic settings, fitted with a 180deg lens (Nikon AF DX Fisheye-Nikkor 10.5 mm f/2.8G ED; Nikon Instruments, Melville, NY, U.S.A.). Percent canopy openness was calculated by converting images into binary color (black pixels = closed canopy, white pixels = open canopy) using a binarization algorithm provided by the Auto Threshold Plugin for ImageJ software (Abramoff, Magalhaes and Ram 2004; Rasband 2014), and then calculating the percent of white pixels in each frame.

A 1.11-m2 digital elevation model was used to derive the following layers: aspect, slope, Topographic Position Index, and Direct Solar Radiation. Aspect was scaled into a linear variable ranging from 0 (xeric, southwest-facing slopes) to 2 (mesic, northeast-facing slopes) using the Beers transformation (Beers, Dress and Wensel 1966; O'Donnell, Thompson and Semlitsch 2015). Topographic Position Index (TPI) is a measure of landscape convexity which was calculated by comparing the slope position of individual sample plots relative to a 150-m2 surrounding landscape area using a neighborhood function (Guisan, Weiss and Weiss 1999). During the calculation of TPI a suite of additional neighborhood scales were considered, beginning with a circular area of 50 m2 and increasing incrementally by 50 m2 to 1500 m2. The most appropriate TPI scale was selected by correlating each TPI calculation with plot averages of raw salamander counts and identifying the scale with the highest correlation coefficient. Direct Solar Radiation—a component of the total solar radiation—represents the quantity of solar radiation remaining after a fraction is absorbed by the atmosphere (diffuse solar radiation) or reflected off of the earth's surface (reflected solar radiation). Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) is a measure of vegetative cover (range: -1.0 [barren] to 1.0 [heavily vegetated]) and was derived using imagery from the 2016 National Agriculture Imagery Program. All data were gathered with ArcGIS 10.3 (ESRI 2011). See Table 1 for a description of all sampling and site covariates. 

Sampling Covariates

The quantity of fallen coarse woody debris larger than 20 cm in diameter (Muller and Liu 1991) and rocky cover within each VES transect were counted. Leaf-litter depth was measured with a metric ruler at five equidistant points within each survey transect. Solar conditions during surveys were quantified by measuring the ambient luminous flux (perceived power of light) at breast height with a digital illuminance light meter (TekPower, model: LX1330B). Finally, date and time of day of each survey was recorded. See Table 1 for a description of all sampling covariates.
