Methods copied from research article:

https://doi.org/10.1111/een.12517

Study sites

In 1999 and 2000, eight replicated landscapes (hereafter 'blocks') were created by clear-cutting 40 open-habitat patches from mature pine plantation forest (Pinus taeda) at the Savannah River Site in South Carolina, U.S.A. The resulting patches have since been actively restored to regenerating longleaf pine savannas through implementation of prescribed fires on a 2- to 3-year rotation, planting of longleaf pine seedlings (Pinus palustris), and removal of hardwoods. Each patch is 1.375 ha and separated by at least 150 m from the nearest neighbouring patch (see Tewksbury et al., 2002 for details). In May 2013, we conducted vegetation surveys to estimate the number and species richness of flowers available for bumble bee foragers in each fragment. Flower morphologies varied greatly between most observed plant species (e.g. Rubus spp., Vaccinium stamineum, Toxicodendron pubescens, and Opuntia humifusa). Therefore, plant species richness was used as proxy for flower diversity. Bumble bees occur naturally in the area. For additional information on vegetation and patch configuration, see Herrmann et al. (2017).

Study species

Nest boxes, each containing one colony of the common eastern bumble bee (B. impatiens), were obtained from a commercial breeder (Koppert Biological Systems, Romulus, Michigan). Nest boxes consisted of a 35 x 30 x 25-cm cardboard box, containing a liner box. The nest boxes were placed on a platform below a sunroof to lower the impact of weather and harmful ground-dwelling arthropods (Herrmann et al., 2017). At the start of the experiment, each nest box contained a bumble bee colony with 15-30 workers, one queen, brood, and honey stores. As the colonies used in our study were of commercial origin, the initial set of workers may have varied in size. However, data collection began 51 days after colony setup, a period after which most or all workers should have been replaced by offspring of the queen (Nhi, 2014).

Experimental setup

On 4 April 2013, two nest boxes of B. impatiens were placed in each of 32 open-habitat patches, resulting in a total of 64 nest boxes. In all patches, nest boxes were placed along one edge of the patch. Each nest box was 33.3 m from one of the two edge corners and 33.3 m from each other. For additional information on nest box setup, see Herrmann et al. (2017).

Two colonies died before the end of the study and were excluded from further analyses.

Measurements of bumble bee size and colony performance

Nest boxes were collected after 51 days in the field. This duration for the study was chosen for two reasons. First, after approximately 50 days, B. impatiens colonies typically stop producing brood; assuming reproductives were produced, those individuals would be present in the colonies at that time (Cnaani & Hefeetz 1994). Second, bumble bees had started building cell structures outside of the cardboard boxes due to space limitations, which ultimately could have skewed our colony mass results. Nest box collection was conducted at night (between 22.00 and 03.00 hours), when most foragers and gynes had returned and activity in the colony was low (Goulson, 2003). Bumble bees found within 50 cm of a nest box were included in that colony's sample. Each nest box was transferred into a large plastic bag and placed in a freezer (_10 C) to euthanise the bees and preserve them for measurement. Nest box locations in the field were revisited the next morning between 08.00 and 11.00 hours to collect foragers that had not returned to the nest box the previous evening. The number of all mature bumble bees in each colony was counted and their body size measured, using thorax width to the closest 0.5 mm. Thorax width was measured with calipers at the widest point of the thorax. Colony mass, defined as the combined mass of all larvae, wax, honey and pollen, was determined after removing all nesting material and mature bumble bees. Mature bumble bees were excluded from colony mass to keep colony mass independent from metrics calculated exclusively from mature bumble bees. Two colonies perished before the end of the study and were excluded from further analyses. Colony size was assessed by two metrics: the number of bumble bees (workers and males) and the colony mass at the end of the study ('current mass'). We decided that for our research question, current mass was preferable to mass gain because bumble bee size distributions might change during the life cycle of a colony (e.g. Couvillon et al., 2010b) and therefore current bumble bee size distributions might be less suitable to reflect past mass gains. However, mass gain and current colony mass were highly correlated (Pearson's r: _ = 1, P < 0.001), and the use of mass gain as the dependent variable would have produced similar results. Reproductive success was assessed as the number of gynes (virgin queens), because population dynamics are probably most affected by gyne output (Williams et al., 2012). Even though colonies may achieve reproductive success through male production, queens must overwinter and establish new colonies, two stages of the life cycle with high expected mortality of reproductives (Beekman et al., 1998, Goulson, 2003, Williams et al., 2012). Gynes were distinguished from workers (non-productive females) and males by size, as there is little overlap between workers/males and gynes in B. impatiens (Goulson, 2003, Cueva del Castillo & Fairbairn, 2012). Male numbers are generally low within B. impatiens colonies (Cnaani et al., 2002, Bernauer et al., 2015), especially in the later stages of the colony cycle (Cnaani & Hefetz, 1994), and leave the colony soon after they emerge to forage on flowers, search for mates and, in contrast to gynes, permanently depart the colony (Goulson, 2003). When we first started measuring bumble bee sizes in our colonies, random samples revealed an insignificant proportion of males among non-gyne individuals (< 1%; six males in 1109 measured bumble bees across 26 colonies). Consequently, we did not record measurements of males separately; all measurements of non-gyne bumble bees are for workers and males combined (hereafter, 'worker/male').
