Transducers were placed in streams in the portion of the channel that most consistently had water.  All transducers are in PVC stilling wells anchored to posts or against a concrete apron at the edge of a large culvert through which one of the streams (Otter Pond Brook) travels under a bridge.  Transducers log every 15 minutes.  Data are downloaded at field sites and processed in HOBOware using the Barometric Compensation Assistant, which calculates stream depth based on the difference between the stream transducer barometric pressure and the reference transducer barometric pressure. Data were collated and QAQC'd in R version 3.2.3. Data QAQC was comprised of the following: (1) recoding obviously errant data to NA; (2) recoding transducer download artifacts (such as very low or negative depth readings around the time of download indicating the transducer was not in the water when the data were recorded) to NA; and (3) recoding negative depths to zero (only at King Hill, tributary #805). Depth calculations do not take into account the difference in barometric pressure due to elevation differences between the reference transducer and the stream transducer; all elevations are within 5 meters of the reference transducer, a difference that has been evaluated empirically to be a negligible factor for depth assignment in this dataset.

For most processing in HOBOware using the Barometric Compensation Assistant, the timestamps of the reference transducer and the in-stream transducers were matched; however, where the reference transducer and the in-stream transducer were not matched in timestamp, we elected to allow HOBOware's software to linearly-interpolate  between the barometric pressure readings of the reference transducer (Option 1 in the HOBOware software) when utilizing the Barometric Pressure Assistant to calculate stream depth.

Additional notes about each of the streams relevant to interpretation of the data: Otter Pond Brook (tributary #505) has odd pressure and depth patterns because of an upstream dam that has boards that hold back rising water level until the boards are overtopped (or removed). Jumps in data are assumed to be due to the dam. The location of the pressure transducer at Chandler Johnson (tributary #665) tends to fill up with sand and is sometimes must be dug out at download time.  A small sewage treatment plant is within the watersheds of Blodgett Brook South (tributary #788) and Blodgett Brook North (tributary #790) upstream of the transducer thus there is a possible source of hydrologic release to either watershed. It appears that the plant mainly impacts the flow and stream height of Blodgett Brook South (tributary #788) as evidenced by occasional higher nutrient measurements coming from that stream relative to Blodgett Brook North (tributary #790) and other monitored tributaries. Blodgett North (tributary #790) and South (tributary #788) have quite different flow regimes despite their proximity, something we believe to be primarily a function of their watersheds.  Blodgett North (tributary #790) has had physical evidence of high flows (e.g., mud and debris caught high on a staff gauge and on the adjacent banks) after times of large depth records, so we believe the depth values are correct despite being substantially different from those recorded on nearby Blodgett South.  King Hill (tributary #805) occasionally goes dry and leaves the transducer exposed to air. Herrick South (tributary #830) is on a short segment of stream connecting a wetland to Lake Sunapee.  

Elevation of transducers were derived from the 2009 USGS National Elevation Dataset 10m Digital Elevation Model obtained from the National Map Seamless server on 28July2009.  Data about elevation and transducer location is provided in a stand-alone table.  

ArcGIS data layers for Sunapee and its sub watersheds as well as additional field notes and metadata from transducer downloads are available on collaborative request. Contact Holly Ewing (hewing@bates.edu) for additional files.
