attributeName	attributeDefinition	class	unit	dateTimeFormatString	missingValueCode	missingValueCodeExplanation
Round	"Identifies in which round of collected data were used for analyses. In all, four rounds of sampling were done. However, only data from rounds 1 and 4 were used to analyze disease growth on the plants. "	categorical				
Site	Identifies at which of the 8 corridor project experimental sites the date were collected	categorical				
Patch	"Identifies in which of the five patches per site the data were collected. Patches are lettered A, B, C, D, and E with A being the center patch, B being the connected patch, and C, D, and E labeling patches clockwise from Patch B"	categorical				
Shape	Identifies the patch as one of two possible shapes.	categorical				
Transect	Identifies location of each plant within the patch. Two diagonal transects were drawn from the north and south facing corners of each patch. 	categorical				
Plant	"Identifies which plant data were collected from. Three plants were placed along each transect within the patch at distances approximately 0, 20, and 40 meters from the corner of the patch. Although only two corners of each patch were used, location of the plant was still identified using the corner number corresponding with how corners are labeled for the larger focal species experiment."	categorical				
Distance	"Identifies location of plant along transect as either near the corner, near the center, or in between the corner and center plants"	categorical				
Leaf	"Identifies which leaf data were collected from. For each plant, three leaves were marked and photographed."	categorical				
Lesions	"Data were collected by photographing marked areas of leaves on each plant. Photographs were then analyzed by overlaying a grid on the photo and counting number of grid squares containing lesions, number of grid squares containing herbivory, and total number of grid squares covering any part of the marked area of the leaf. This column contains the number of squares containing lesions. "	numeric	dimensionless		.	Missing data
Total	"Data were collected by photographing marked areas of leaves on each plant. Photographs were then analyzed by overlaying a grid on the photo and counting number of grid squares containing lesions, number of grid squares containing herbivory, and total number of grid squares covering any part of the marked area of the leaf. This column contains the number of total squares covering any part of the marked area of the leaf."	numeric	dimensionless		.	Missing data
Herb	"Data were collected by photographing marked areas of leaves on each plant. Photographs were then analyzed by overlaying a grid on the photo and counting number of grid squares containing lesions, number of grid squares containing herbivory, and total number of grid squares covering any part of the marked area of the leaf. This column contains the number of squares containing herbivory."	numeric	dimensionless		.	Missing data
perclesions	Percent of leaf area covered by lesions from target disease. Calculated by dividing number of grid squares with lesions by total number of grid squares. 	numeric	dimensionless		.	Missing data
perclesionsnoherb	Percent of leaf area covered by lesions form target disease after subtracting the area of the leaf covered by herbivory.	numeric	dimensionless		.	Missing data
percherb	Percent of leaf area covered by herbivory. Calculated by dividing number of grid squares with herbivory by total number of grid squares.	numeric	dimensionless		.	Missing data
