Methods copied from:

Johnson, B., and N. Haddad. 2011. Edge effects, not connectivity, determine the incidence and development of a foliar fungal plant disease. Ecology 92(8): 1551-1558.

Site description:

We conducted our study in a large-scale replicated habitat corridor experiment located at the Savannah River Site, a National Environmental Research Park south of New Ellenton, South Carolina, USA. This model system has been shown through a meta-analysis to yield results that are qualitatively similar to those obtained across many larger, observational studies (Gilbert-Norton et al. 2010). The corridor experiment began in 2000 and consists of eight 50-ha experimental landscapes. Each replicate landscape (block) is composed of five ;1-ha regenerating habitat patches located in mature loblolly (Pinus taeda) and longleaf (P. palustris) pine plantation matrix. Within each of the eight blocks, patches are arranged with a central 100 x 100 m source patch and four peripheral patches 150 m away. The central patch is connected to one peripheral patch by a 25 m wide corridor (Fig. 1). The design of this experiment includes controls for patch shape that allow us to test whether movement between patches is facilitated by the connectivity provided by a structural habitat corridor (Appendix). Importantly for the interpretation of this study, isolated winged patches with corridors that do not connect to other patches have 50% more edge relative to their area than equal-sized but more compact rectangular patches (Fig. 1). 

Study organisms:

Within these landscapes, we used the model plant- pathogen system sweet corn (Zea mays) and southern corn leaf blight (Cochliobolus heterostrophus anamorph Bipolaris maydis) to conduct our experiments. Extensive knowledge of this economically vital agricultural crop and its diseases makes it an ideal model organism to study the movement of plant pathogens. Southern corn leaf blight is a wind-dispersed foliar fungal pathogen endemic to the southern United States and currently distributed worldwide. Southern corn leaf blight is specific to corn, allowing us to control host density and eliminate complexities due to alternative hosts. The disease is polycyclic and can complete a life cycle in less than three days, allowing for rapid dispersal and infection during our experiments. These spores are distinct from the majority of other fungal spores and are easily identified (see Plate 1; White 1999). Importantly, neither corn nor southern corn leaf blight were found in or near (conservatively, within 8 km) our experimental landscapes. 

Data collection:

Experiment one. To test the effect of corridors on the movement of southern corn leaf blight, we placed plants in all five patches in all eight blocks. We then provided a source of spores by inoculating only plants in the center patches 4, 11, and 37 days after placing them into the field. A detailed explanation of how plants and diseases were propagated can be found in the Appendix. We collected data on presence or absence of disease lesions during four separate sampling periods: 14-19, 26-27, 33-36, and 47-49 days after placing plants into the field. We classified disease as present or absent on each of the top five leaves of each plant. We photographed lesions during the first, third, and fourth data collection periods. We collected tissue samples during the fourth data collection period by cutting out pieces of leaf tissue that had lesions and placing them into sealed plastic petri dishes. We analyzed tissue samples by placing them in a moist chamber under a fluorescent light to induce sporulation. We determined positive samples by identifying the spores of southern corn leaf blight using a dissecting microscope. We also determined presence or absence of disease using the photographs of lesions taken in the fourth sampling period. Using tissue samples and photographs of lesions, we scored each plant as positive, negative, or indeterminate for disease. Based on the results of experiment one, we conducted two separate experiments the following year. 

Experiment two. We designed experiment two to examine the effects of corridors on the movement of southern corn leaf blight spores, while removing the confounding factors of differing environmental conditions and within-patch spore dispersal on disease development. Like experiment one, we placed corn plants in all five patches within all eight blocks, inoculating only plants in center patches. Unlike experiment one, we placed all plants at the same distance from habitat edges (Fig. 1; Appendix). We also placed plants in the field for a shorter time, allowing primary dispersal from source plants located in the center patches, but removing plants from the field before secondary or within-patch dispersal could occur. We collected peripheral patch plants six days after placing them into the field. We placed each plant into an individual plastic bag to prevent cross-contamination during transport and to provide standard environments for spores to infect and develop into lesions. After the plants had been covered for 5-6 days, we collected tissue samples from the plants by clipping lesions from leaf tissue and placing them into individual petri dishes. Tissue samples were incubated and analyzed as in experiment one. 

Experiment three. We designed experiment three to assess the effects of patch shape and distance to edge on disease development. Unlike experiments one and two, we did not test spore dispersal but instead inoculated all plants equally to determine differences in disease development (Fig. 1; Appendix). Six days after inoculation, we marked 10-cm sections on each of three leaves per plant (see Plate 1). We photographed the marked sections six, 10, 14, and 18 days after inoculation. We analyzed the photographs to determine the percentage of marked leaf area covered with lesions and the percentage of leaf area damaged by herbivores for all leaves. We tested the effects of patch shape and distance to edge on the percentage of marked leaf area covered with lesions over time, and included levels of herbivory as a covariate. 

Temperature data:

To interpret the influence of microclimate among patches and across edge distances for disease patterns, we collected temperature data using HOBO dataloggers (Onset Computer, Pocasset, Massachusetts, USA) between 16 June and 14 July 2008. Dataloggers were placed in 16 locations in each patch: ;2, 14.5, 27, and 51 m along diagonal transects coming from the corners of the patches. Data were recorded in all five patches at each site every 10 min for four days per site. For analyses, only data recorded between 07:00 and 19:00 hours were used, as nighttime temperature was expected to be nearly uniform across edge distances.
