Methods are from the original published research paper (Klug et al. 2012) and were, slightly modified from the text of the published paper, as follows: We quantified lake thermal stability as Schmidt stability (Joules per square meter), a measure of the amount of work required to overcome density stratification and completely mix a lake. Daily Schmidt stability was calculated as in Idso (1973) using the software program Lake Analyzer (Read et al. 2011). Density was calculated using average daily water temperature at each depth. The calculation did not take into account the effect of changing lake depth; such changes would have negligible effects on our results because Schmidt stability is calculated using temperature and bathymetry profiles at 1 m resolution and storm inputs resulted in  less than 1 m change in depth in lakes for which we have information.

High frequency dissolved oxygen, water temperature, and meteorological measurements were used to calculate net ecosystem production (NEP), respiration (R), and gross primary production (GPP) (Van de Bogert et al. 2007). Seven lakes were included in the metabolism calculations. Kensico and Lacawac were not included due to lack of appropriate oxygen data. Sensors at each lake measured dissolved oxygen at one depth in the epilimnion (0.5 - 2 m for all lakes), water temperature throughout the water column, and photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) and wind speed above the lake. If there were fewer than four data points for dissolved oxygen concentration or water temperature per day, that day was discarded from further analysis; otherwise, gaps in data were linearly interpolated to 15 min time steps. If gaps in wind and PAR values were greater than 60 min, that day was discarded from analysis. We modeled dissolved oxygen dynamics for each 24 h period using a simple model where the rate of change in dissolved oxygen concentration is equal to GPP (the average daily rate of photosynthesis (in mg oxygen per liter per day)) minus R (the average rate of respiration (in mg oxygen per liter per day)) plus D (the flux of oxygen between the lake water and the atmosphere). GPP and R are fit as constant daily rates with GPP only occurring during daylight. The atmospheric flux (D) was modeled using an empirical model from Cole and Caraco (1998) where the movement of oxygen between the lake and atmosphere is dependent on the wind speed and the difference between the concentration of dissolved oxygen in the water and the concentration at saturation for that water temperature. We chose the Cole and Caraco 1998 wind formulation because the wind was lower than 10 meters per second and in the range for which this model is most appropriate for all of the pre-storm period and greater than 87% of wind measurements for all lakes (greater than 98% for all but three lakes) during the three days including and immediately following the storm.

In each lake, the metabolism model is based on a single spatial measurement of dissolved oxygen and our estimates of R and GPP are for the mixed layer only. We fit each 24 h lake-day with parameters GPP and R that minimized the negative log likelihood fit for the lake using R statistical packages (R Development Core Team 2009). NEP is calculated as GPP-R. 

All data presented in these datasets are the same as used in the following manuscript: Klug, J.L., D.C. Richardson, H.A. Ewing, B.R.Hargreaves, N. R. Samal, D. Vachon, D.C. Pierson, A. E. Lindsey, D. O'Donnell, S.W. Effler, and K.C. Weathers. 2012. Ecosystem effects of a tropical cyclone on a network of lakes in northeastern North America. Environmental Science and Technology 46(21): 11693–11701. When preparing these data for publication, we discovered that data from some lakes was recorded in Eastern Daylight Time (EDT) and some was recorded in Eastern Standard Time (EST).  We have included a column in each of the data files to alert the user to these differences.  We believe that the slight discrepancy in time had negligible effects on the results published in the original paper.

Cole, J. J.; Caraco, N. F. Atmospheric exchange of carbon dioxide in a low-wind oligotrophic lake measured by the addition of SF6. Limnol. Oceanogr 1998, 43 (4), 647−656. 

Idso, S. B. On the concept of lake stability. Limnol. Oceanogr. 1973, 18 (4), 681−683.

Klug, J.L., D.C. Richardson, H.A. Ewing, B.R. Hargreaves, N. R. Samal, D. Vachon, D.C. Pierson, A. E. Lindsey, D. O'Donnell, S.W. Effler and K.C. Weathers. 2012. Ecosystem effects of a tropical cyclone on a network of lakes in northeastern North America. Environmental Science and Technology 46(21): 11693–11701.

Read, J. S.; Hamilton, D. P.; Jones, I. D.; Muraoka, K.; Winslow, L. A.; Kroiss, R.; Wu, C. H.; Gaiser, E. Derivation of lake mixing and stratification indices from high-resolution lake buoy data. Environ. Model Software 2011, 26 (11), 1325−1336. 

Van de Bogert, M. C.; Carpenter, S. R.; Cole, J. J.; Pace, M. L. Assessing pelagic and benthic metabolism using free water measurements. Limnol. Oceanogr.: Methods 2007, 5, 145−155

R Development Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing; R Foundation for Statistical Computing: Vienna, Austria, 2009.
