Small mammals were trapped monthly from July, 2013 to May, 2016 excluding months with nighttime temperatures below freezing. Traps were set over three consecutive nights on the weekend closest to the new moon when small mammals are most active. Two permanent trapping webs are established that cross a creosote shrubland to black grama grassland ecotone. Webs are designed with 145 traps distributed on 12 equally spaced spokes containing 12 traps apiece that radiate out from a central stake where a single trap is placed (Parmenter et al. 2003). During each trapping bout, Sherman live traps are baited with rolled oats, peanut butter, and heat-treated millet. Traps are checked at dawn each day, closed during the day, and reset just before dusk. Upon capture, each individual is marked with a unique identifier in the form of an electronic pit-tag or ear-tag and species, sex, age (adult or juvenile), mass, reproductive condition (males: scrotal or non-scrotal; females: lactating, pregnant, or not pregnant), and ear/pit tag number are recorded. Only trap number and pit tag are recorded for subsequent captures of a single individual within a trapping bout. During processing, a 50 microL blood sample will be obtained by slipping a heparinized micro capillary tube behind the eye to puncture the pre- (Cricetids) or retro-orbital (Heteromyids) sinus. Capillary tubes are capped, labeled, and placed on ice for transport to the lab.  Within ten hours of capture, blood samples are centrifuged to separate red blood cells from plasma. Red blood cells are placed into micro capillary tubes sealed with paraffin and frozen for future analysis. Plasma is pipetted into pre-weighed tin capsules for isotopic analysis of delta13C for dietary width anddelta15N for dietary breadth. Plasma delta13C turnover in laboratory mice Mus musculus has a half-life of approximately 17 days, so monthly sampling provides a near continuous dietary record. All animals were released at their original trapping location in accordance with animal trapping and processing protocols approved by the UNM Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC #A4023-01). 

The specific data per animal is spot checked against the field data sheets for accuracy. Isotope values are referenced against international standards of Vienna Pee-Dee Belemnite (VPDB) for carbon and AIR for nitrogen. Measured isotope values were calibrated against international standards using internal reference materials analyzed alongside plasma and plant material samples to correct for within-run instrument drift. Repeated within-run measurement of these reference materials yielded an analytical precision (SD) of 0.2permille for both delta13C and delta15N values.