Methods copied from:

Herrmann, J., Haddad, N.M. & Levey, D.J. Apidologie (2017) 48: 545. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13592-017-0499-1

1. Study sites

We tested our hypotheses in a large experimental landscape at the Savannah River Site (SRS) in South Carolina, USA. Eight replicate landscapes (hereafter "blocks") consisting of fragments and corridors of open habitat were created in 1999/2000 (six blocks) and 2007 (two blocks) by clearing mature pine forest. The cleared areas are being actively restored to longleaf pine savanna through implementation of prescribed fires on a 2-3-year rotation, planting of longleaf pine J.D. Herrmann et al. seedlings (Pinus palustris), and removal of hardwoods. Each block consists of one center fragment (100 m x 100 m) surrounded by four peripheral fragments, each 150 m from the center fragment. One of the peripheral fragments ("connected fragment") in each block is connected to the central fragment by a 25 m wide and 150 m long corridor. The other three peripheral fragments are isolated from the central fragment by 150 m of pine forest and are either "rectangular" (100 m x 137.5 m) or "winged" (100 m x 100 m with two 25 m x 75 mm projections on opposite sides). While the increased area of rectangular fragments controls for the increased area provided by the corridor of the connected fragments, the projections of the winged fragments control for the area as well as for the shape of the corridor (for more details, see Tewksbury et al. 2002). Each block contained one duplicate rectangular (four blocks) or winged fragment (four blocks). Each block was surrounded by a forested buffer zone with limited management activities (400 m radius around the block's center point). The experimental landscapes have been used to investigate effects of fragment shape and connectivity on dispersal of various organisms, including plants, butterflies, and birds (Herrmann et al. 2016, Haddad 1999, Tewksbury et al. 2002). For the present study, rectangular and winged fragments were both classified and analyzed as "isolated" because local fragment shape was assumed to be of minor importance for resource availability. Connectivity, on the other hand, has been shown to influence the ability of bees to reach remote food sources (Cranmer et al. 2012). Naturally occurring pollinator communities within the fragments mainly consisted of butterflies (Lepidoptera), flies (Diptera), and beetles (Coleoptera). The activity, density, and species richness of Hymenoptera pollinators was relatively low; only a few solitary bees have been observed nesting within the fragments and commercial honeybee hives are not permitted within the borders of SRS. Blocks were at least 1 km from the border of SRS, but distances were generally much larger (up to 12 km).

2. Study species and experimental setup

Queenright colonies of the common eastern bumblebee (Bombus impatiens Cresson) were obtained from a commercial breeder (Koppert Biological Systems, Romulus, MI, USA). Each colony resided in a plastic nestbox (approx. 34 cm x 29 cm x 29 cm) placed within a cardboard box (35 cm x 30 cm x 25 cm). Each nestbox consisted of two connected compartments, a lower-level compartment (approx. 2 cm height) containing the queen, and an upper-level compartment containing the workers, brood, and nest structures. Slits in the wall dividing the two compartments were large enough to allow the queen to interact with individuals in the upper compartment, but too small for her to leave the lower compartment. Two holes in the nestbox allowed bumblebees from the upper compartment to exit or enter the colonies. A one-way flap within each hole allowed bees to only exit or only enter through a given hole. At the beginning of the experiment, each nestbox contained 15-30 workers, one queen, brood, and honey stores. A pilot study showed that Bombus impatiens colonies were able to successfully forage in our experimental blocks, but that heat and fire ants (Solenopsis invicta) were major threats to colony survival. Thus, all colonies in the current study were protected from the sun by a roof made of corrugated white plastic and protected from fire ants by placement on platforms which were elevated by 30-cm rebar stilts covered with TangleTrap (Contech Enterprises Inc., Victoria, BC, Canada). Further, the ground under the colonies was covered with landscape fabric (Blue Hawk Basic; Lowe's, Mooresville, NC, USA) to prevent growing plants from creating new pathways for fire ants to reach the colonies. In mid-April 2013, two colonies were established in each of the peripheral fragments in all blocks, resulting in a total of 64 colonies (eight blocks _four peripheral fragments/block _ two colonies/fragment). The two colonies were placed along the fragment edge closest to the center fragment, 33 m from the nearest corner and 33 m from each other. All colonies were oriented such that entrance and exit holes were facing the center of the peripheral fragment. Two colonies died before the end of the study and were excluded from further analyses.

3. Assessment of mass, colony size, and reproductive success

We used three metrics of colony performance: increase in mass, increase in total number of workers, and increase in number of virgin queens (gynes, hereafter). Each nestbox was removed from its cardboard box and weighed to determine the mass gain of the colony. Thus, colony mass includes colony structures (e.g., wax cells, honey) as well as bumblebees in all developmental stages. To provide baselines, each colony was weighed and the number of bumblebees counted before placement in the field. Once in the field, each colony was weighed after 9, 30, and 51 days. To minimize the number of bumblebees outside their home colony during weighing, the weighing took place between 8:00 and 11:00 h (except on day 0 and 51; see below). The exit but not entrance hole of each colony was closed for at least 2 h prior to weighing to provide workers enough time to return to the colony. Single bumblebees could still be found outside of the colony during weighing, but their numbers were roughly equal among colonies. After 51 days, the colonies were removed from the field at night (22:00-3:00 h). Any bumblebees on top or below the cardboard box at that time were collected and added to the respective colony. Colonies were transferred into large plastic bags and placed at -10 _C to euthanize the bumblebees. Locations where colonies had been removed were revisited during the next morning between 8:00 and 11:00 h to collect any bumblebees in the immediate vicinity (0.25 m2), which we assumed belonged to the colony at that location. Bumblebees were counted and body size was measured by thorax width (_0.5 mm), a standard measurement of bumblebee size (Goulson et al., J.D. Herrmann et al. 2002). Workers were distinguished from gynes by size, as there tends to be little overlap between worker and gyne size in pollen-storing bumblebees, such as B. impatiens (Goulson 2012). Males (drones, hereafter) could not be distinguished from workers and were therefore included in the worker count for all analyses (Goulson et al. 2002, Williams et al. 2012). This inclusion resulted in a loss of information regarding reproductive success. The impact of including drones in the worker count, however, was relatively low: Drones depart from the colony soon after they hatch to forage on flowers, search for mates (Cueva del Castillo and Fairbairn 2012), and, in contrast to gynes, permanently depart the hive (Goulson 2012). Thus, the number of drones in a colony is typically low in comparison to worker numbers. Colony size was defined as the number of workers and drones. Reproductive success of a colony was defined as the number of gynes.

4. Floral surveys

In May 2013, surveys were performed to estimate floral resources. In all fragments containing colonies (N = 32), floral resources were recorded within two 2 m x 35 m transects. Number of flowering plants with seed set (past food source), flowers (present food source), and flower buds (future food source) were counted. Only plant species on which bumblebee visits had been observed were recorded. Recorded plant species (with observed flowering times) were as follows: Baptisia perfoliata (L.; April-May), Erigeron strigosus (Muhl. ex Willd.; April-May), Gamochaeta purpurea (L.; April-May), Gelsemium sempervirens (L.; December-May), Mimosa microphylla (Dryand.; April-July), Opuntia humifusa (Raf.; May-July), Rhynchosia reniformis (DC.; May-August), Rubus spp. (April-July), Toxicodendron pubescens (Mill.; March-April), and Vaccinium stamineum (L.; May-June). One of the two transects was located close to the fragment edge, starting at a randomly selected corner and heading towards the fragment center. The other transect was located at the center of the fragment, starting at the center point and heading towards a randomly selected corner. The chosen transects did not overlap at their ends. Flowering plants recorded in both transects were summed to represent the amount of floral resources per fragment (hereafter local floral resources). Similar floral surveys were performed within the forest surrounding the experimental fragments to evaluate the significance of the forest as a food source. Floral resources were recorded within four transects of 35 m length and 2 m width around all fragments containing colonies. Transects were located on lines which started at two randomly selected corners of the fragments, heading away from the fragment with an angle of 135 deg from each of the two fragment sides joining at the corner. Flowering plants were recorded at distances between 0 and 35 m and between 70 and 105 m for each of the two lines.

5. Surrounding open land

To evaluate the impact of potential food sources outside of the experimental fragments on bumblebee colonies, the amount of open habitat within a 500 m radius around each hive was calculated using ArcMap (Esri, Redlands, CA, USA). Open habitat consisted mainly of roadways and power line clear cuts. The used radius was chosen because 500 m represents the distance, which lies within the foraging range of most bumblebee species (Goulson 2012) and at least one bumblebee species may cross up to 600 m of forest to reach floral resources (Kreyer et al. 2004).
