Cross Reservoir has a small protected 50 ha watershed consisting entirely of grasslands and forests. Water inflow is derived from direct precipitation and from 2 ephemeral streams. A drainage standpipe regulates reservoir water level and serves as the main outflow, and an auxiliary emergency overflow spillway is situated on the right overbank side of the dam. Because Cross Reservoir has no permanent surface inflows, it is not susceptible to strong hydraulic flushing events, evidenced by the fact that the auxiliary spillway overtopped just twice from 1991-2016. Its water column exhibits low levels of suspended soils and dissolved organic color and therefore maintains consistently high water clarity because of the limited fluvial inputs. Hills and trees are located on 3 sides of the reservoir, shielding the lake surface from the wind, and the east end toward the dam is relatively open. As a result, thermal stratification begins each year in April, and complete mixing occurs during November. The bottom of the epilimnion is typically located at 3 m in July and usually deepens to approx. 9 m by early November. The bottom of the epilimnion is defined here as the bottom of the first 1 m depth interval that exhibited a >1 C temperature decrease per meter. The water column also consistently exhibits strong chemical stratification during the summer months. Sporadic ice cover can occur during December–February. Deep chlorophyll maxima typically occur below the thermocline from April into November. Diel vertical migration of layers has been followed in detail from 1994 through 2016 (deNoyelles et al. 2016). 

In many respects Cross Reservoir functions more like a smaller natural lake in the U.S. or Canada than the local (constructed) reservoirs nearby or in the region. This is related to the physical setting of Cross Reservoir, which permits extended periods of thermal stratification, and to the high level of water clarity such that sufficient light for plant growth (the 1% depth) reaches below the summer epilimnion upper mixing zone. In most natural lakes, also with deeper light penetration, this supports deep algal growth in layers often as dense as surface algal blooms so common in regional reservoirs. deNoyelles et al. (2016) recorded diel migration of phytoplankton layers in Cross Reservoir over a 24-year period, which to this extent  has not been reported for other lakes and reservoirs.

Relevant publications:

Chapin, B.R.K, F. deNoyelles, Jr., D.W. Graham, and V.H. Smith.  2004.  A deep maximum of green sulphur bacteria (“Chlorochromatium aggregatum”) in a strongly stratified reservoir.  Freshwater Biology 49:1337-1354.

deNoyelles Jr., F., V.H. Smith, J.H. Kastens, L. Bennett, J.M. Lomas, C.W. Knapp, and D.W. Graham.  2016.  A 21-year record of vertically migrating subepilimnetic populations of Cryptomonas spp.  Inland Waters: Journal of the International Society of Limnology 6(2):173-184. doi:10.5268/iw-6.2.930.

Kettle, W.D.  2016.  The University of Kansas Field Station: A platform for studying ecological and hydrological aspects of climate change.  Kansas Academy of Science 119(1):12-20. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1660/062.119.0104.

Knapp, C.W., F. deNoyelles, Jr., D.W. Graham, and S. Bergin.  2003.  Physical and chemical conditions surrounding the diurnal vertical migration of Cryptomonas spp. (Cryptophyceae) in a seasonally stratified midwestern reservoir (USA).  Journal of Phycology 39:855-861. 
