Site Selection. Eighteen sites (stands) were selected to sample old growth forest across a diversity of upland soil types and topographic positions.  Paired mid-slope and ridge-top stands were sampled on the dissected terrain of Arboleda (2 pairs), Jaguar (3 pairs), and Matabuey (3 pairs) soils.  Holdridge and Experimental soils, on flat to gently undulating terrain, are more spatially limited; one stand was sampled on each soil type.  Stands were located well within the mapped boundaries of the soil units (Figure 1).  Stand abbreviations and characteristics are given in Table 1.  Soil, climate and vegetation descriptions are available in McDade et al. (1994).

Within each stand, 20 restricted-random sample points were located along 3-4 transects.  Sample points were 20-30m apart within transects and transects were 50-70m apart depending on the topography and other constraints of the terrain.  At each point circular quadrats were used to sample understory vegetation, litter, light, and soil conditions according to the protocol described below.

Vegetation Sampling.  Nested circular quadrats were used to sample understory shrubs (25m2) and small trees (100m2). For the purposes of this study, the shrub size class was defined to include all plants, excluding vines and lianas, taller than 0.5m and smaller than 5cm dbh.  This category then comprised herbs (including ferns and monocots), woody shrubs, understory trees, and saplings of canopy trees, but excluded vines and lianas. Small trees were defined as woody plants between 5 and 10cm dbh and included understory trees and saplings of canopy and emergent species.  

All individuals rooted in soil were counted and identified.  Herbarium collections were made for each species for which field identification was in doubt.  Voucher collections are deposited at the La Selva Biological Station Herbarium. In 1987-89, identifications were reviewed by botanists familiar with the taxonomy of the Costa Rican flora. Identifications were confirmed or revised in 2015 according to our most recent understanding of the taxonomy and the nomenclature was brought up to date with current systematics and the La Selva plant list available through the OTS web page (https://tropicalstudies.org).

Site Information.  At each sample point (quadrat), we collected the following information:  percent slope, soil pH(H2O), extractable phosphorus, soil organic carbon, percent incident radiation and standing fine litter mass. For soil analyses (pH, P, and soil organic carbon) we took a single soil core (5.5cm diameter, 15cm deep) at each sample point. Immediately on returning to the laboratory, soil samples were homogenized and roots and wood particles removed.  Subsamples were taken for P analysis, percent soil moisture, pH, and organic matter.  Extractable P was estimated as described by Vitousek and Denslow (1986) using an acid fluoride extractant (Olsen and Sommers 1982). Soil pH was measured in a 1:2.5 soil:water slurry made up with distilled water.  Soil moisture was calculated as percent moisture loss from 10g fresh soil dried to constant weight at 110oC.  Soil organic matter was analyzed on a LECO carbon analyzer at the USDA Forest Soils Laboratory at Oregon State University on 5 pooled samples from each stand (Nelson and Sommers 1982). Standing fine litter was collected from a 1 m2 quadrat randomly located within each shrub quadrat.  Litter was sorted into leaves, twigs (less than 2mm diameter), and reproductive material, oven dried, and weighed. Here we report data on standing leaf litter dry mass.

Hemispherical canopy photographs were taken at 1.5 m above the center of each quadrat to estimate incident light availability. Black and white photographs taken with a Minolta f7.5m fisheye lens were interpreted for percent total annual direct and indirect radiation using the public domain computer program CANOPY(c) developed by P. Rich (1990).  This technique weights the proportion of canopy openness under the track of the sun to calculate percent total direct radiation (Direct Site Factor) and under the azimuth to calculate percent reflected skylight (Indirect Site Factor).  Percent total annual available sunlight was calculated as the weighted average of direct and indirect radiation (0.45 DSF + 0.55 ISF).  

Literature Cited.

MCDADE, L. A., K. S. BAWA, H. HESPENHEIDE, AND G. S. HARTSHORN (Eds.) 1994. La Selva: Ecology and Natural History of a Neotropical Rain Forest. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

NELSON, D. W., AND L. E. SOMMERS. 1982. Total carbon, organic carbon and organic matter. In: A. L. Page, R. H. Miller, and D. R. Keeney (Eds.) Methods of Soil Analysis. Part II. Chemical and Microbiological Properties. pp 539-580, Amercan Society of Agronomy, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

OLSEN, S. R., AND L. E. SOMMERS. 1982. Phosphorus. In A. L. Page, R. H. Miller, and D. R. Keeney (Eds.) Methods of soil analysis. Part II. Chemical and Microbiological Properties. pp. 403-430. American Society of Agronomy, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

RICH, P. M. 1990. Characterizing plant canopies with hemispherical photographs. Remote Sensing Reviews 5:13-29.

SOLLINS, P., F. SANCHO M., R. MATA CH., AND R. L. SANFORD, JR. 1994. Soils and soil process research. In: L. A. McDade, K. S. Bawa, H. Hespenheide, and G. S. Hartshorn (Eds.). La Selva: Ecology and natural history of a Neotropical rain forest. Pp. 34-53. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

VITOUSEK, P. M. AND J. S. DENSLOW. 1986.  Nitrogen and phosphorus availability in treefall gaps of a lowland tropical rainforest. J. Ecology 74: 1167-1178.

