Methods copied from:

Sullivan, L. L., B. L. Johnson, L. A. Brudvig, and N. M. Haddad. 2011. Can dispersal mode predict corridor effects on plant parasites? Ecology 92(8): 1559-1564.

Site description:

We conducted our study at the Savannah River Site, a National Environmental Research Park near New Ellenton, South Carolina, USA, in a large-scale replicated corridor experiment. The experiment, established in 2000, is composed of eight ;50-ha experimental blocks, each consisting of five ;1.4-ha forest openings (habitat patches), created by harvesting a densely planted longleaf (Pinus palustris) and loblolly (P. taeda) pine plantation, which now forms the matrix (Fig. 1A). Patch vegetation established naturally after clearing, and consists of an herbaceous and shrubby ground layer, while the pine plantation matrix has a dense layer of pine litter with few of the herbaceous species from patches. Experimental blocks are ;1-10 km apart, and thus vegetation is likely genetically unrelated. Patch arrangement within blocks consists of a central 100 x 100 m patch and four surrounding patches 150 m away. The central patch and one peripheral patch are connected by a 25-m-wide corridor. The other three peripheral patches are unconnected and are of two types: rectangular or winged. Rectangular patches consist of the same 100 x 100 m area as the central patch plus the area of a corridor added on to make a larger patch. Winged patches have two 75-m dead-end ''corridors,'' each half the area of the corridor, added to either side of a 100 x 100 m area (Fig. 1). This design tests for (1) effects of patch shape by holding connectivity constant (comparison of winged and rectangular patches), and (2) effects of connectivity by holding patch shape, or edge-to-interior area ratios, constant (comparison of connected and winged patches).

Species descriptions: hosts and parasites:

We surveyed for incidence of three species of abiotically dispersed foliar fungi and five species of insect-induced galls. All parasite species and their respective host individuals naturally colonized patches after creation of the experiment. Of the foliar fungi, one species was found on Solidago odora and two were found simultaneously on three common species of Lespedeza. All biotically dispersed, gall-inducing insects were found to oviposit on S. odora. Gall-inducing insects and foliar fungi infect plants by invading plant cells with either insect larvae or fungal hyphae (Gagne 1989, Agrios 2005), and both can decrease plant fitness by parasitizing host plant tissue (Jarosz and Davelos 1995, Leege 2006). Solidago odora (Asteraceae) is a perennial clonal forb native to the southeastern United States (Weakley 2010). As a genus, Solidago is commonly infected by both foliar fungi and gall-inducing insects (Farr et al. 1989, Root and Cappuccino 1992). Lespedeza hirta, L. stuevei, and L. virginica (Fabaceae) are perennial clonal legumes native to the southeastern United States (Weakley 2010). Lespedeza species are commonly infected by a variety of foliar pathogens (Farr et al. 1989) that cause easily distinguishable lesions on the leaf surface. Foliar lesions were identified at the North Carolina State University Department of Plant Pathology in consultation with Dr. D. Shew. We classified fungal pathogen spores from these lesions to genus and confirmed known presence of disease on our species using Farr et al. (1989). Although these diseases had not previously been identified in South Carolina, they have been confirmed on plants in surrounding states. Foliar leaf spots of S. odora were identified as anthracnose caused by pathogens in the genus Colletotrichum (Farr et al. 1989). Spores of this genus are abiotically dispersed by splashing and windblown rain (Sinclair 1982). We quantified three main types of foliar lesions on Lespedeza. Two were foliar fungal pathogens from the genera Uromyces and Cercospora. Spores of these genera disperse primarily by wind, but Cercospora can also be dispersed by water (Sinclair 1982). A third and less common type of lesion was caused by insect damage to the leaf tissue. On L. hirta, we found Cercospora damage to be the most common type of lesion (60.7% of all leaves with lesions showed this type), followed by Uromyces lesions (28.9%), and insect damage (24.5%). On L. stuevei, we found Uromyces lesions to be the most common type of lesion (64.5%), followed by Cercospora lesions (30.3%), and insect damage (10.6%). Gall-inducing insects on S. odora were identified as two types of stem galls induced by tephritid flies and moths, and three types of apical meristem galls induced by midge flies. Midge gallers were the most common parasite, making up 92% of the infections, followed by moth galls (5%) and tephritid fly galls (3%). Because of low sample size, gall-inducing insects were pooled for analysis.

Data collection:

For all species we collected data in one patch of each type (connected, winged, and rectangular) per block. When duplicate patch types occurred within a block, we randomly selected one patch of each type per block to sample. We collected data for S. odora in six blocks and for Lespedeza species in eight blocks. To determine the effects of edge on parasite incidence, we selected plants along edge transects within 12.5 m of the patch edge and interior transects within the center 25 3 25 m of each patch (.37.5 m from the edge) for Lespedeza and the center 50 3 50 m (.25 m from the edge) for S. odora (Fig. 1A). We conducted S. odora surveys in September and October of 2008 and Lespedeza surveys between June and August of 2007 and in August of 2008. These surveys corresponded with periods at or near maximum annual prevalence of each parasite. 

Abiotically dispersed foliar fungi.-Since both S. odora and Lespedeza spp. were multistemmed, we defined individuals as all ramets arising from a single point. Ramets arising from points .20 cm apart were considered different individuals. On randomly chosen individuals, we selected one ramet either at random (S. odora) or by selection of the tallest ramet (Lespedeza spp.). On each selected ramet we surveyed all leaves for presence/absence of foliar lesions. In each patch, we sampled up to 20 S. odora individuals per distance and 8 Lespedeza individuals of each species per distance. 

Biotically dispersed gall-inducing insects.-We surveyed insect galls on the same S. odora plants as for foliar lesions. Due to lower occurrence of galls, we included up to 40 additional individuals per patch at each distance from the edge. Once an individual plant was selected, we surveyed all ramets and counted the total of each of five types of galls per individual. 

Density surveys.-To control for the potential effects of host density during our tests of corridor effects on parasite incidence, we quantified density of host plants during parasite surveys. We surveyed density of Lespedeza during surveys for lesions and density of S. odora in August of 2009. For Lespedeza we quantified density by counting the number of ramets from each individual surveyed as well as all congener ramets within 2 m of each focal ramet. For S. odora we counted the total number of plants and stems in two randomly selected 12.5 3 12.5 m plots at the centers and edges of all patches surveyed the previous year.
