The experiment was conducted at Kellogg Biological Station (KBS) in southwestern Michigan as part of a larger experiment on intercropping.  These plots were part of a larger conventional annual tillage program followed by the KBS Long Term Ecological Research site. A complete randomized block design was used. There were four blocks, each containing 10 plots, 2 m × 1.8 m in size. Plots and blocks were separated from each other by 1 m and 2 m walkways, respectively. The factors were fully crossed, and consisted of two levels of fertilization (fertilized or unfertilized) and five crop types (soybean monoculture, corn monoculture, intercrop-replacement, intercrop-additive, and unplanted). Ammonium nitrate fertilizer (34-0-0, NPK) was used, based on the soil test recommendations by the KBS Long Term  Ecological  Research  Center,  and  hand  scattered  a month after sowing when corn plants had reached a height of 25 - 30 cm, at a rate of 124 kg/ha of actual N or 363 hg/ha of fertilizer. Two plots per block were left unplanted to determine weed community characteristics in the absence of crops. Each planted plot had seven rows, 30 cm apart. Within each row, seeds were sown 20 cm apart from each other. In the replacement intercrop, alternate rows of corn and soybean were sown (four rows of corn and three of soybean).  In the additive intercrop, corn density was the same as in the corn monoculture (seven rows spaced 30 cm apart), and soybeans were planted between the rows of corn. Total density was therefore seven rows of corn plus six rows of soybeans in these plots. Seeds were sown on 3 June 1993. DeKalb corn (Zea mays) hybrid variety DK524 obtained from DeKalb Plant Genetics Co.  in DeKalb, Illinois, USA, and Pioneer soybean (Glycine max) hybrid variety 9272 obtained from Pioneer Hi- Bred International, Inc. in Johnston, Iowa, USA were used in the experiment.

Weeds were sampled on 22-23 August, 1993, which was the peak of biomass production (about 12 weeks after the crops were sown). A 20-cm strip was harvested from each plot, across the rows in crop-planted plots and in the center of the unplanted plots, giving a sample area of 1.8 m × 20 cm, or 0.36 m2. All weeds rooted within this strip were clipped at ground level, sorted to species and dried to constant weight. Total biomass, species richness, and species diversity were calculated based upon above-ground dry weight. Richness (S) was determined as the number of species present in a 0.36 m2 sample.  Shannon's index of diversity H' was calculated as:

H' = p_i 〖log〗_10 p_i

where pi is the proportion of each species in the sample. Individual crop plants within the sample area were also clipped above ground at the same time as weeds were harvested, and dried and weighed. 
