attributeName	attributeDefinition	class	unit	dateTimeFormatString	missingValueCode	missingValueCodeExplanation
year	"The year column refers the year of study. Plant-pollinator interaction sampling was conducted in three years: 2013, 2014, and 2015. Data type: integers; values can be 2013, 2014 or 2015."	numeric	nominalYear			
date	The date column refers the specific date that a 15-minute observation period occurred. Date values are reported as month/day/year	Date		YYYY-MM-DD		
day_of_year	"The day_of_year column refers to the specific day of year that a 15-minute plant-pollinator observation period occurred. Day of year values are integers, where for each year, 01 January = 1, 02 January = 2, etc. Data type: integer."	numeric	number		NA	not available
week_num	"The week_num column refers to the sampling week that a 15-minute observation period occurred within. A value of 1 refers to the first week of sampling. Data type: integer, dataset value range 1–16."	numeric	number		NA	not available
site	The site column refers to the specific meadow site that the observations were conducted within. There were two meadow sites: Shady Point and Twin Meadows. These are reported as shady_point and twin_meadows respectively. Data type: factor	categorical				
transect	"The transect column refers to the specific transect the observation was conducted near. At each of the two sites there were 25 x 1 m transects that served as guidelines for interaction sampling. Therefore, transect values are integers and range from 1–4. Datatype: integers. Dataset range = 1–4."	character				
start_time	"The start_time column refer to start and end times of each 15-minute sampling period, respectively. Data type = 24hour time (hh:mm)"	Date		hh:mm:ss		
end_time	"The end_time column refer to start and end times of each 15-minute sampling period, respectively. Data type = 24 hour time (hh:mm)"	Date		hh:mm:ss		
plant	"The plant column refers to the plant species that was visiting by specific pollinator during an interaction observation. Values are plant species names reported as genus_species, e.g., Claytonia lanceolata = claytonia_lanceolata. Data type: factor."	character				
pollinator	"The pollinator column refers to the specific pollinator species that visited a specific plant species during an interaction observation. Values are pollinator species (or morphospecies) names reported as genus_species, e.g., Bombus appositus = bombus_appositus. Morphospecies names deviate from this general pattern, but are generally recorded as, for example: Muscidae_spp_01. Data type: factor."	character				
interactions	The interaction column refers to the number of observed interactions (flower visits) that occurred between a unique plant and a pollinator pair during a 15-minute observation period. Data type: integer. Measurement unit is the number (count) of visitation events (interactions) made by a given pollinator species to a given plant species.	numeric	number		NA	not available
pollinator_family	The pollinator_family column refers the taxonomic family name for the pollinator in the observation. Data type: factor.	character				
pollinator_group	"The pollinator_group column refers the type of pollinator for the pollinator in the observation. These are course designations, including: bee, fly, bird, butterfly. Data type: factor."	character				
pollinator_sex	"The sex column refers the sex or caste (for bumble bees) of the pollinator, if known. For most pollinators, this information can be difficult  to determine in the field, therefore, most values are reported as NA. For bumblebees, sex (= caste) includes: male, queen, and worker. Data type: factor."	character				
pollinator_2013	"The pollinator_2013 column refers to the specific pollinator species that visited a specific plant species during an interaction observation, but standardized with 2013 pollinator species names. Pollinator taxa resolution for several species was coarser for 2013 compared to 2014 and 2015. Therefore in order to compare interaction turnover among years (as in CaraDonna et al. 2017), all shared taxa need to be at the same taxonomic level. For example, in 2013, syrphid flies were only identified to the family level; in 2014 and 2015, almost all syrphids were identified at least to genus. Thus, to compare interactions among these years, the pollinator_2013 name is syrphidae_spp. Data type: factor."	character				
observer	The observer column refers to the initials of the specific researcher that conducted the observation. Observers include: PJC = Paul J. CaraDonna; RMB = Ross M. Brennan; JLC = James L. Cunningham; NMW = Nick M. Waser; JAB = Justin A. Bain; AMI = Amy M. Iler. Type: factor.	categorical				
