Article associated with this dataset:

Resasco, J., D. J. Levey, and E. I. Damschen. 2012. Habitat corridors alter relative trophic position of fire ants. Ecosphere 3(11): 1-9.

Study site:

We conducted this study at the Savannah River Site, South Carolina (33.20 N, 81.40 W) in ten randomized and replicated blocks designed to test effects of corridors on ecological processes. Patches were created by clearing mature pine plantation forest and are now managed for restoration to longleaf pine savanna, a species-rich, endangered habitat (Van Lear et al. 2005, Jose et al. 2006). Restoration practices include prescribed fire, planting of longleaf pine (Pinus palustris) seedlings, and mechanical removal of hardwood trees. As a result, the ground-layer vegetation in patches is diverse and productive relative to the understory of the pine forest matrix.

Each block consists of five patches. In the center of each block is a 1 ha "center" patch, and four peripheral patches. Peripheral patches are 150 m from the center patch and are of three types: "connected", "rectangular", and "winged". Connected patches are connected to the center patch by a 150 m long, 25 m wide corridor of the same habitat (Fig. 1A). Rectangular and winged patches lack a corridor connecting to the center patch and are thus isolated or unconnected. They are equal in area to the connected patch, 1.375 ha (1 ha plus the area of the corridor, 0.375 ha). The equivalent area of the corridor is added to the winged patches as two lateral 75 m long, 25 m wide "wings" and to the rectangular patches as additional area on the far side of the patch. Connected and winged patches have similar edge-to-area ratios (491 m/ha and 509 m/ha, respectively) which are substantially higher than the edge-to-area ratio of rectangular patches (345 m/ha). This design allows us to test for corridor effects independent of patch shape effects by comparing response variables from connected patches to those from winged patches, which are unconnected but nearly identical in edge-to-area ratio. Similarly, we can test for patch shape effects independent of corridor effects by comparing response variables from winged patches to those from rectangular patches, which differ greatly in edge-to-area ratio but are identical with respect to connectivity (i.e., they are both unconnected). Each block contains either a second winged or a second rectangular patch (Fig. 1B). We averaged response variables from duplicate patch types within each block.
