We conducted an in situ experiment in Yellowstone between August 2014 and August 2017 (Fig. 2). The experiment was a 2 x 2 factorial design with two climate treatments and two soil types. Climate treatments included current conditions in subalpine forests of Yellowstone and warmer-drier conditions consistent with projected mid-21st century climate in subalpine forests of Yellowstone. Soils vary across Yellowstone. Thus, we used two soil types from areas that had recently burned to evaluate how differences in soils (i.e., soil texture) can mediate effects of climate on tree regeneration.

To select experimental sites, we used gridded climate projections (12-km resolution) of moisture deficit (annual precipitation minus annual potential evapotranspiration) from the 4th International Panel on Climate Change report (IPCC 2007), made available by the Nature Conservancy’s Climate Wizard database (http://climatewizard.org/). We selected an ensemble product of three general circulation models (GCMs) that accurately represent historical conditions in Yellowstone, CCSM 3.0, CNRM CM3.0, and GFDL CM 2.1 (Westerling et al. 2011) forced with the A1B emissions scenario. We first characterized the mean (± SD) growing season moisture deficit between 2050 and 2060 for pixels within the current distribution of lodgepole pine in Yellowstone. We then identified pixels at lower treeline (~2,000m) where recent (2002-2012) growing season moisture deficit was consistent with the future projections for lodgepole pine forest (Fig. 2B) and selected three experimental sites within these pixels (Fig. 2A). High-elevation cool-wet experimental sites were in lodgepole pine forest (elevation = ~ 2,430 m) that had recently burned in stand replacing fires (between 2008 and 2012) (Fig. 2A). 

In summers 2014 and 2015, intact soil cores were collected (n = 168 each summer, 336 total) from two recent fires (both burned in 2012). The first soil type was derived from rhyolite parent material and was a mixed superactive Dystric Cryochrept (hereafter, rhyolite). It was collected from the Cygnet Fire (1,400 ha), which burned lodgepole pine-dominated forest. The second soil type was derived from sedimentary rocks and was a loamy-skeletal, mixed, superactive, Eutric Haplocryalf (hereafter, sedimentary), which we collected from the Fontanelle Fire (19,000 ha) south of Yellowstone. Both fires were severe and stand replacing (i.e., all understory vegetation and overstory canopy was killed). Lodgepole pine was present before the Cygnet Fire and both lodgepole pine and Douglas-fir were present before the Fontanelle Fire. Flat soil collection sites were chosen within each fire perimeter to minimize any aspect or topographic effects. At each soil collection site, two 50-m transects were established and a soil core (10-cm diameter by 20-cm depth) was harvested on each side of the transect using PVC tubes at ~ 1-m increments. Soil samples (10-cm depth) were also collected, sieved, and dried at 60 degC for 24 hours, and then were analyzed for soil texture (% sand, % silt, % clay), % total soil N (micro Kjeldhal procedure), soil pH (measured in water), % organic matter (determined using dry combustion), and available phosphorous (Bray P1 extract) by the University of Wisconsin Soil and Plant Analysis Laboratory, Madison, WI, USA (UW SPAL 2013). Soil cores were kept cool during transport and storage.

At each study site, one experimental plot was established in 2014 and 2015 (separated by > 100m) and 14 cores of rhyolite and 14 cores of sedimentary soils (n=28 total) were planted in clusters of four cores, with each cluster separated by 50 m (Fig. 2C). Plots were arranged in a hexagon with six clusters of soil cores on the outside surrounding a middle cluster (Fig. 2C). For each cluster, we recorded aspect (0-360deg) and terrain shape (no slope, convex or concave slope). Soil cores were not placed on slopes steeper than 30deg. The middle cluster of soil cores in each experimental plot was instrumented with one Decagon 5-TM volumetric soil moisture and temperature sensor in a core of each soil type and one sensor placed nearby in the native soils (Fig. 2D). These sensors collected hourly data on soil surface temperature and volumetric soil moisture for the experiment duration (with some gaps due to damage by animals).

In each soil core, 20 locally collected lodgepole pine or Douglas-fir seeds were planted ~ 0.25 cm below the soil surface. Lodgepole pine seeds were collected from trees with serotinous cones at lower elevations of the species’ range (~2050 m). Only cones that were > 3 years old were harvested to ensure seeds were mature. Serotinous cones were dried at 40 degC for 12 hours until they opened. Douglas-fir cones were collected in late August to late September from upper elevations of species’ range (2,100 m - 2200 m). In 2014, Douglas-fir seeds were collected before cones were mature, leading to very low germination rates (< 1 % in the experiment). However, in 2015, Douglas-fir seed collection was successful. Hardware mesh (0.6 cm openings) was then secured over the surface of the cores during the first season to deter granivory but still allow precipitation to fall unhindered. The mesh was removed once seedlings established so growth was not affected. During the experiment, all understory/herbaceous vegetation was regularly clipped around soil cores to minimize shading. At the end of each growing season (2015-2017), we measured tree seedling establishment, mortality, seedling heights, and seedling basal diameters.

Optimal germination was measured by germinating seeds in the lab at 21 degC in petri dishes with filter paper that was kept wet with deionized water. Overhead lights matched the daylength in Yellowstone during the growing season. The trials were run for one month. Optimal germination for lodgepole pine seeds in 2014 was 43 % and 62 % in 2015. Douglas-fir optimal germination in 2015 was 16 %. In 2014, Douglas-fir germination was not tested due to lack of seed (all was needed for experiment).

At the end of the experiment, we characterized weather conditions for growing seasons (May-August) between 2015 and 2017 by analyzing records from weather stations near our low- and high-elevation experimental sites (Tower Junction, and Yellowstone Lake, respectively) (https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/). We calculated daily growing season air temperature and cumulative precipitation during the growing season (amount of precipitation that accumulated since October 1st of the previous year) and we compared these values with 30-year normals (1981-2010) for each weather station.
