Methods copied directly from published paper:

Hudgens, B.R., W.F. Morris, N.M. Haddad. W. Fields, J. Wilson, D.C. Kuefler, and R.T. Jobe.  2012.  How complex do models need to be to predict dispersal of threatened species through matrix habitats?  Ecological Applications 22:1701-1710.


Study site:

We conducted this study within six experimentally fragmented landscapes in the uplands of the Savannah River Site (SRS) near Aiken, South Carolina, USA. SRS is located in the southeastern U.S. coastal plain, with gently rolling to flat uplands primarily supporting sandy Paleudult soils (80-90% sand; Kolka et al. 2005) and Pinus palustris Mill. (longleaf pine) and Pinus taeda L. (loblolly pine) plantations (Blake 2005). The experimental landscapes, located on level uplands, were created in winter 1999-2000 by harvesting trees from mature (>50 years old) pine plantations, creating open habitat patches within a pine plantation matrix. The habitat patches have since become dominated by shrubs and grasses and are managed with prescribed fire to promote longleaf pine woodland, the historically dominant ecosystem at our sites and throughout the uplands of SRS (White 2005).

Each of the six experimental landscapes was 50 ha in area and represented a single statistical block. Each block contained one central 100 x 100 m patch surrounded by four peripheral patches 150 m from the central patch (Fig. 1). One of the peripheral patches was 100 x 100 m and connected to the central patch by a 25 x 150 m corridor, which was also composed of open habitat. The other peripheral patches were isolated from the central patch by 150 m of matrix habitat and were either rectangular (100 x 137.5 m) or winged (100 x 100 m with two 25 x 75 m projections on opposite sides). Each block contained one duplicate rectangular or winged patch. Three of the experimental landscapes contained one winged and two rectangular patches, with the winged patch opposite the connected patch and wings and corridor at 90 deg angles (as in Fig. 1), whereas the other three landscapes contained two winged and one rectangular patch, with the rectangular patch opposite the connected patch and wings and corridor aligned. For this study, we used one of each patch type (connected, rectangular, winged), randomly selecting one of the duplicate patches, in each block. This study design allowed us to distinguish between how corridors alter fire through creating a connection (comparison of connected and winged patches) as opposed to changes associated with the creation of edge (comparison of rectangular and winged patches, which contain ca. 50% more edge).

Wildfires have been suppressed at SRS since its creation in the early 1950s and although prescribed fire has been widely implemented at SRS during the past decade (Shea and Bayle 2005), little if any burning occurred within the locations comprising our six experimental landscapes between 1950 and 1999. The six landscapes have received low-intensity prescribed surface fires in 2004, 2007, and 2009 (this study). The 2007 and 2009 burns were conducted during the dormant season, whereas the 2004 burns were conducted during the growing season. Individual landscapes were burned as parts of larger burn units (i.e., all patches within a landscape were burned together, along with the surrounding matrix) and different landscapes were burned on separate days. The six burns in this study occurred between late January and late March 2009, on days supporting a variety of environmental conditions (Table 1). Half of the sites were ignited by hand and half aerially (Table 1). For hand ignitions, multiple fire fighters ignited surface fuels with drip torches while walking burn unit peripheries. From these ignitions, fires burned into the internal portions of the landscapes, including the study patches and matrix. Ignitions were made without reference to experimental landscape orientation. Aerial ignition occurred via delayed aerial ignition devices (DAIDs) deployed via helicopter. DAIDs were deployed throughout the experimental landscapes, resulting in numerous ignition points in study patches and matrix. Reports from ignition crews suggest that a higher density of DAIDs were deployed into experimental patches than matrix; however, we do not have reason to suspect any bias among experimental patch types (i.e., connected patches did not receive more ignitions than unconnected patches).

Fire temperature and effects:

To assess effects of corridors on fire temperature, patterns of spread, and ensuing effects of these patterns on vegetation, we established a set of 5 x 5 m sampling plots within each block (Fig. 1). We used eight total plots per block (Fig. 1). Connected center, rectangle center, and winged center plots were located in the center of each respective patch type. Corridor plots were located in the center of the corridor. We also positioned plots along patch edges, to evaluate the different types of edges in each patch type. Corridor opening plots were in the connected patch, at the opening of the corridor. Winged opening plots were in the winged patch, at the opening of a randomly selected wing. Rectangle edge plots were in the rectangular patch, located at the midpoint of a randomly selected long-axis edge, adjacent to the pine plantation matrix. Matrix plots were located halfway (75 m) between the central patch and a randomly selected unconnected peripheral patch (winged or rectangular). To account for small-scale heterogeneity in fire temperature (Wally et al. 2006, Mitchell et al. 2009), each plot contained nine circular subplots. The subplots were 1 m in diameter spaced 1 m apart on a 3 x 3 grid.

We used metal pyrometers to determine fire intensity at each subplot (Hobbs et al. 1984, Iverson et al. 2004, Wally et al. 2006). Pyrometers are ideal for landscape-scale fire-temperature monitoring, as they are easily produced, deployable over large spatial scales, and provide temperature readings that are highly correlated with data logger thermocouples (Iverson et al. 2004, Wally et al. 2006). We constructed pyrometers out of copper tags streaked with 15 Tempilaq Temperature Indicating Liquid paints (Tempil, South Plainfield, New Jersey, USA) ranging from 177 C to 538 C, in 28 C increments. To prevent difficulty in interpreting pyrometers due to charring, we secured a second copper tag over the paints. We deployed the pyrometers during the morning before each prescribed burn and collected them the following day. We placed one pyrometer in the center of each subplot, supported 5 cm above the soil surface by steel wire.

To understand the influence of fuel loading on fire intensity, we quantified fuels prior to prescribed fires using a two step process in January 2009. We first nondestructively sampled fuels for each subplot. We visually estimated bunch grass cover, measured litter depth at the center of the subplot, and counted downed woody material (DWM) in four diameter classes (0-0.64, 0.65-2.54, 2.55-7.62 and >7.62 cm) along a transect bisecting each subplot. We used Brown's calculations (Brown 1974) to convert DWM counts into biomass estimates. We then converted these nondestructive measurements to biomass for our system, using linear regression models and data from 35 destructively sampled plots, of equal area to our subplots, but located outside of our study plots. Following destructive sampling, we dried (at 60 C for 48 hours) and weighed biomass from each destructive plot, sorted by litter, bunch grass, and DWM. We predicted biomass, based on regression models, for bunch grass, litter, and DWM from these 35 destructively sampled plots. Model fits for individual components were strong (bunch grass r2 = 0.76; litter r2 = 0.80; DWM r2 = 0.64).

To understand effects of fire on vegetation, we counted live woody stems and visually estimated bunch grass cover, which is one of the most common and abundant species groups at our study sites (E. I. Damschen and L. A. Brudvig, unpublished data) for each subplot prior to and after prescribed fire (January and June 2009).
