Site Descriptions

All chronosequences used in this analysis were selected based on the criteria that sites had been cultivated long enough to achieve a new (lower) equilibrium C stocks (Baer et al. 2015), were planted to perennial C4 grasses, and contained at least 9% clay, as grassland restored on soil with little to no clay content does not accrue C on a decadal time scale (Baer et al. 2010). 

The southeast Nebraska site consisted of 22 independent restorations that were part of the Unites States Department of Agriculture’s Conservation Reserve Program, with ages ranging from 4–19 years restored. These restorations were on silty clay loam (Fine smectitic, mesic Aquertic Argiudolls) soils formed by loess with 0–6% slope. Crop rotations in this area often include corn, wheat, oat, soy, and sorghum. Most of these fields were restored by sowing equal amounts of 6 grass species (Andropogon gerardii Vitman, Schizachyrium scoparium (Michx.) Nash, Panicum virgatum L., Pascopyrum smithii (Rydb.) Á. Löve, Bouteloua curtipendula (Michx.) Torr., and Sorghastrum nutans (L.) Nash). This region had a mean annual temperature of 10.9° C of and a mean annual precipitation of 757 mm. Baer et al. (2010) and Bach et al. (2010) provide a detailed description of the fields sampled in this chronosequence.  

The northeast Kansas site consisted of 6 independent restorations, with ages ranging from 1–35 years restored. These restorations were on Reading silt loam (fine silt, mixed, superactive, mesic Pachic Argiudoll) soils formed from alluvial silt deposits and Clime silty clay loam (fine, mixed, active, mesic Udothentic Haplustolls)– Sogn silt loam complex (loamy, mixed, superactive, mesic Lithic Haplustolls) soils formed from residuum from shale and limestone respectively. Sampled areas had less than 5% slope. These fields were in cultivation for 50 or more years prior to restoration. Crop rotations in this area often include corn, soy, sorghum, and winter wheat. These fields were restored by sowing a variety of seed mixes. The most commonly encountered plant species were Andropogon gerardii Vitman, Sorghastrum nutans (L.) Nash, and Lespedeza capitate Michx. This site had a mean annual temperature of 12.7° C of and a mean annual precipitation of 833 mm. Scott et al. (2017) provide a detailed description of the fields sampled in this chronosequence.        	

The northeast Free State site consisted of 17 independent restorations near Harrismith, with ages ranging from 4–44 years restored. These restorations were on fine loamy sand to fine sandy loam, thermic, mixed Typic Plinthustalfs soils with less than 5% slope. The fields were in cultivation for 30 or more years before restoration. Crop rotations in this area often include fallow, wheat, corn, and sunflower. Most fields were restored by sowing Eragrostis curvula (Schrad.) Nees. This site had a mean annual temperature of 13.8° C of and a mean annual precipitation of 635 mm. Baer et al. (2015) provide a detailed description of the fields sampled in this chronosequence.

Measurements


We used measurements of root biomass, root C:N ratio, bulk density, percent of macroaggregates by whole soil mass, percent of microaggregate-within-macroaggregates by combined macroaggregate mass, microbial biomass C, total PLFA biomass, PLFA fungi:bacteria ratio, and microaggregate-within-macroaggregate C from the perennial grassland restoration chronosequences in southeast Nebraska, USA (SENE) (Bach et al. 2010; Baer et al. 2010), northeast Free State, RSA (NEFS) (Baer et al. 2015), and northeast Kansas, USA (NEKS) (Scott et al. 2017). All data were produced using the same methods, with the exception of sample depth increments. Data from Scott et al. (2017) and Baer et al. (2010) were derived from 0-10 cm soil depth. Data from Baer et al. (2015) collected in NEFS were derived from the 0-5 cm and 5-10 cm depth. The sequestered soil carbon (represented by the microaggregate-within-macroaggregate fraction) were not previously reported for the SENE and NEFS studies. 

At all sites, intact soil cores (5 cm dia.) were removed and stored at 4oC until processed (within one week of sampling). In the laboratory, each core was broken along planes of natural weakness and passed through an 8 mm sieve. Roots were then removed with forceps, washed with deionized water and dried (60°C) to determine root biomass. Dried roots were ground to a fine powder and 5-10 g of soil was analyzed for %C and %N by dry combustion followed by gas chromatography on a CN Analyzer (Thermo Scientific, New Brunswick, NJ USA). A subsample of freshly sieved soil (~20 g) was used to determine gravimetric water content and back-calculate bulk density based on the volume and dry weight of soil. Another subsample of freshly sieved soil (30 mL) was frozen in a falcon tube and later used for PLFA analyses. A subsample of ~100 g was air dried and used for aggregate fractionation. 

Phospholipid fatty acid biomarkers were extracted from soils using a chloroform extraction (Bligh and Dyer 1959; Bossio et al. 1998; DeGrood et al. 2005). Solid phase extraction was used to separate the neutral- and glycolipids from the phospholipids. Fatty acid methyl esters were dissolved in hexane and analyzed with gas chromatography. See previous publications for full details (SENE: Baer et al. 2010; Bach et al. 2010; NEFS: Baer et al. 2015; NEKS: Scott et al. 2017).   

A hierarchical wet-sieving method was used to fractionate soil into aggregate classes and further isolate microaggregates-within-macroaggregates according to Six et al. (2000 a and b). Soil passing through an 8 mm sieve was air dried before slaking and isolating aggregates (>2 mm: macroaggregates; <2 mm and >250 μm: small macroaggregates; <250 μm and >50 μm: microaggregates; and < 50 μm: silt and clay). Macroaggregates were dried at 60° C and then shaken in water on a fine mesh with 50 4-mm ball bearings. The mesh isolated particulate organic matter within the macroaggregates. The water was then poured over a 50 m sieve to isolate microaggregates within the macroaggregates. This fraction was dried at a low temperature (60° C), then analyzed for %C and %N using the same methods described for root biomass. Carbon stocks for this fraction and bulk soil (total C stocks) were calculated using minimum equivalent mass. In the case of NEKS total C stocks were calculated as the sum of C in aggregate fractions. See previous publications for full details (SENE: Baer et al. 2010; Bach et al. 2010; NEFS: Baer et al. 2015; NEKS: Scott et al. 2017).  
