Methods are described in detail in the manuscript "Carbon quality regulates the temperature dependence of aquatic ecosystem respiration", published in the journal Freshwater Biology. Briefly, six mesocosms were filled with 17 L of water from the deep chlorophyll maximum (DCM) of Lake George, NY. These represented an autochthonous dissolved organic matter (DOM) treatment. We also used water from a nearby bog, but diluted this so that DOC concentrations were similar across all mesocosms. Six mesocosms were filled with this water, representing allochthonous DOM treatments. Within each treatment type, half were fitted with an aquarium heater that raised temperatures 3-5 degC above ambient temperatures. In each mesocosm, we placed a PME miniDOT high frequency dissolved oxygen sensor programmed to log at ten-minute intervals. The data from these sensors appears in the data table "Raw_DO_Sensor_Data.csv".  Mesocosm experiments were run for approximately 4 weeks.

Wind speed was measured at a gauge located in proximity to the study site on the shore of Lake George. This data appears in the data table "Wind.csv". In addition, shortwave radiation was measured using a pyranometer attached to a buoy located on Lake George approximately 3,000 m from the study site. This data can be found in the data table "Shortwave_Rad.csv".  

Data from the dissolved oxygen sensors, along with wind speed and shortwave radiation was used to calculate daily metabolism estimates. The R package rLakeAnalyzer was used to run these calculations (Winslow et al., 2016). The resulting 27 days of daily ecosystem respiration (ER), gross primary production (GPP), and net ecosystem production (NEP) estimates for each mesocosm appear in the data table "Derived_Metabolism_Estimates.csv".

During the time the experiment was running, water samples were collected periodically from the mesocosms using opaque, acid washed bottles. These were transported to the lab where they were analyzed for absorbance characteristics and dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentration. DOC concentrations were measured using an OI Analytical 1010 TOC analyzer after filtration through a 0.7 µm glass fiber filter. Absorbance characteristics were measured with a Shimadzu UV-2600 spectrophotometer using a 1 cm path length. We calculated the spectral ratio (SR) and specific UV absorbance at 254 nm (SUVA) using the methods of Helms et al. (2008) and Weishaar et al. (2003) respectively. The resulting DOC concentrations and absorbance characteristics appear in the data table "DOC_and_Absorbance.csv".

Helms, J. R., A. Stubbins, J. D. Ritchie, E. C. Minor, D. J. Kieber, and K. Mopper. 2008. Absorption spectral slopes and slope ratios as indicators of molecular weight, source, and photobleaching of chromophoric dissolved organic matter. Limnol. Oceanogr. 53(3):955–969.

Weishaar, J. L., G. R. Aiken, B. A. Bergamaschi, M. S. Fram, R. Fujii, and K. Mopper. 2003. Evaluation of specific ultraviolet absorbance as an indicator of the chemical composition and reactivity of dissolved organic carbon. Environ. Sci. Technol. 37(20):4702–4708.

Winslow, L. A., J. A. Zwart, R. D. Batt, H. A. Dugan, R. I. Woolway, J. R. Corman, … J. S. Read. 2016. LakeMetabolizer: An R package for estimating lake metabolism from free-water oxygen using diverse statistical models. Inland Waters 6: 622-636.
