Site Description:
Our sites are located on the Pumice Plain between the Mount St. Helens Crater and Spirit Lake, within the Pyroclastic Flow Zone created during the May 18, 1980 eruption. The Pumice Plain, formerly an old-growth coniferous forest, was subjected to extreme volcanic forces that began with total scouring and burial as an estimated 800 m high avalanche traveled down-slope as the summit of the volcano collapsed.  This was followed by a powerful lateral blast (pressure wave) and pyroclastic surge with maximum velocity of 1080 km/hr and ended with several hot (600 C), high-velocity, incandescent flows of pumice that surged from the crater over the course of five hours.  In the aftermath, the area was a vast (15 km2), virtually sterile plain of steaming pumice.  The top 10-30 m of the Plain was initially composed of highly erodible pumice; since its creation, it has been dissected extensively with rills and canyons cut by water and mudflows, and substantial areas have been buried by subsequent debris avalanches.
No soil was present on the site immediately after the eruption.  The new substrate was composed of juvenile tephras and pumice spawned during a series of eruptions that occurred during the spring and summer of 1980.  Particle size ranged from sand to cobble, but most prevalent was material ranging from 3-12cm.  Tephra and pyroclastic flow substrates had a low bulk density and high porosity, were friable and well drained, and contained no detectable nitrogen or carbon.  Due to the porous nature of the pumice, mechanical weathering (frost fracturing) occurred quickly.  Within five years much of the larger sized material was reduced to sand and fines.  These smaller substrates were subsequently mobilized by wind or rain, filling the interstices of the larger remaining substrates.  The first known plants, Lupinus lepidus var. lobbii established on the new substrates by 1981, one year after the eruption. 

Sampling.
From 1994-1995, sampling occurred in a set of patches that varied in density.  Individual plant size and damage were recorded, then summed for the patch. A detailed description is provided in Bishop 2002.

From 1998-2017, sampling occurred on long transects (800-2200 m) generally at 100m intervals, and on short transects (15-100m) at variable intervals.  In addition, in 2000 and 2006-2011 we also sampled in a subset of permanent vegetation plots monitored by R. del Moral (University of Washington).  Those data will be posted separately. In many cases the same transect was surveyed each year, with individual plot locations varying for short transects but remaining constant for long transects. On short transects, intervals between quadrat samples were adjusted to more evenly sample across the density gradient. Thus, short transects do not provide a good estimate of the overall density of the area they traverse, whereas long transects do. 
From 1998-2017, we estimated % cover of lupin, % damage by leaf-tiers, % damage by root-borers, and % cover of other plants.  Later in this period we began estimating % cover of moss/cryptogamic crust, litter, bare mineral surface, vascular plants, and elk feces. The years in which these additional components were estimated is summarized below.
Sampling strategy varied according to density.  In high density areas and on short transects, cover estimates were made using 0.5m x 0.5m quadrat frames that were divided by string into 64 squares.  The number of squares filled with lupin, number of squares filled with other plant species, and the number of lupin squares damaged by leaf miner or stemborer, were visually estimated. In low density areas of short transects, if the total number of lupin squares was <6, additional quadrat frames were surveyed until a total of 6 was reached. In later years, as non-lupin vascular plants, organic debris, and moss increased, those components, along with the amount of bare surface and scat, were estimated separately, while lupin was always estimated as the number of squares.  In some years or in some sites cover of non-lupin components was estimated directly, rather than as squares.  In low density regions of long transects, circular plots that varied in radius from 2m to 5m were surveyed.  This was done by dividing the circle into zones, and estimating squares filled or % cover for each component and summing.  Because vegetative cover has increased to an extent that large circular plots are rarely feasible, in 2010, we instead sampled 2-6 1m2 quadrat frames placed around the same central point, generally distinguished by direction.  When additional frames at a single point are necessary to reach 6 squares of lupin they are identified by subpoint.  Bishop was almost always part of the work crew performing estimates and considerable effort was made to have crew members calibrate their estimates to each other and to Bishop’s. 

Change in components estimated over time:
1994-1995.  During these year size and damage was estimated for each individual plant, and summed for a patch or quadrat frame to estimate proportion damage and area.  Detailed methods are described in Bishop 2002.
1998.  Sampling occurred along transects or in discrete patches.  For a patch or 1m2 quadrat frame %cover of lupin and of all other plant material was estimated. Size and damage level were then estimated for 10-20 plants per patch.
1999.  All sampling occurs along transects.  Estimates of %lupin, % other plant material, # of quadrat cells (1/64 of 0.5 x 0.5m quadrat) of lupin, leaf miner, rootborer damaged plant.  At each point, 0.25m2 frames were added until a total fo at least 6 squares of lupin was accumulated.
2000.  Sampled as in 1999.
2001.  Sampled as in 1999, but also separately estimated amount of bare surface.
2002. Sampled as in 2001, but at sites where there was appreciable moss and/or litter, these were estimated separately from non-lupin vascular and bare.
2003.  Sampled as in 1999 (bare not estimated independently), but at some sites moss estimated separately.
	2004-2006 Estimated %cover of lupin, % lupin damaged by leaf tiers and root borers, and %cover of moss, bare mineral surface, non-lupin vascular plants (combined with litter), and lupin litter or # of squares of lupin killed since previous year.
	2007-2017 As in 2004-2006, but made separate estimates of % cover of non-lupin vascular plants, % cover of non-lupin litter, and %cover of elk feces.
DATA ENTRY:
	Microsoft Excel 2000 and 2007, 2010, 2013, 2016
QA/QC:
Hardcopy print out of Excel files were compared against original field data forms. Pairwise plots and histograms were used to look for outliers indicating entry or sorting errors. 
