Methods copied directly from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1656/058.008.0412

We examined the genetic structure of J. coenia in an experimental-model system established in the winter of 1999-2000 within the 1240-km2 Savannah River Site. Eight 50-ha experimental blocks were created to examine the effects of corridors on plant and animal dispersal. Each block contained five open habitat patches within a dense matrix of pine forest. Patches are being restored to Pinus palustris P. Mill. (Longleaf Pine) savannah through restoration of Longleaf Pine and other herbaceous species, and through regular controlled fire. In each block, a central 1-ha patch was surrounded by four other patches, each 150 m away (Fig. 1). This central patch was connected to only one of the peripheral patches (also 1 ha) by a 25- x 150-m corridor. The three remaining patches were unconnected and equal to the size of the connected patch plus the corridor (i.e., 1.375 ha; Fig. 1). For a complete description of the site and establishment of plots, see Tewksbury et al. (2002). This model system was ideal for our questions because a previous study found movement of butterflies from the central patch to peripheral patches was greater with a corridor present (Tewksbury et al. 2002).

Butterfly Collection:

The Common Buckeye is a multi-voltine, open-habitat butterfly that occurs throughout the southeastern United States (Opler 1998). Because the Common Buckeye in the southern US produces more than one generation per year, we estimate that at the time of our collection (summer 2002), from 6-7 generations could have developed within experimental patches since plot colonization in 2000. A total of 111 butterflies were collected from experimental patches during May and June of 2002. We choose this period to collect because populations likely peak in May and June in the deep south (N.M. Haddad, pers. observ.; Pyle 1981). In total, 53 butterflies were collected from patches connected by a corridor, while 58 butterflies were collected from unconnected peripheral patches (for the number of individuals collected in each patch refer to Table 1). No butterflies were sampled within the boundaries of an actual corridor. After collection, we determined that two blocks yielded too few butterflies (n = 7) and thus were excluded from analysis. Therefore, our genetic analysis was based on comparisons between and among six blocks, using a total of 104 butterflies. While sample size was a potentially limiting factor in our experiment, based on the numbers of alleles identified and the amount of genetic variation found across sites (see below), we feel there was a sufficient number of specimens collected to adequately address our primary questions. In order to assess genetic variation in long established populations of J. coenia at SRS, we sampled two populations (n = 18, n = 20) from outside of the experiment. These large, panmictic butterfly populations were sampled from wide, open power-line right-of-ways. Since butterflies from surrounding habitats founded patches within the experimental blocks, the genetic structure of "source" butterflies provides insight into mechanisms responsible for observed genetic variation within the experiment. In all cases, butterflies were captured with a handheld net and stored on ice in the field for no longer than 2 h. Individuals were then frozen and transported to Appalachian State University (ASU), Boone, NC for analysis.

Standard measures of genetic diversity, including observed heterozygosities (Ho; Levene 1949), expected heterozygosities (He; Nei 1978) and Wright's F-statistics (Wright 1951) were calculated using Popgene-32 (Yeh et al. 1997) and F-stat (Goudet 2001). Observed heterozygosity and He across all loci were calculated using a correction for small sample size (Nei 1978). Differences between Ho and He in connected versus unconnected patches were tested for significance at each locus using a paired t-test (Proc GLM, SAS Institute, 2001). Butterflies were pooled in either connected or unconnected patches in an experimental block and the data analyzed using the block as a replicate (n = 6). All values were arcsine transformed to normalize the data. Expected and observed heterozygosities were tested for deviation from Hardy-Weinberg expectations using a chi-square goodness-of-fit analysis. Wright's F-statistics, specifically FST, was used to examine relative amounts of reductions in heterozygosity at a given level of the population structure relative to another more inclusive level of population structure (see Wright 1965, 1978). Results where 0.10 > P > 0.05 are reported as marginally significant.
