Data are a compilation from studies in the primary and grey literature. Citations, including DOI (if available), are provided for each study in the "project_details.csv" file.
Data collection methods are as follows (excerpt from the article associated with the data, Flores et al., 2018):
We conducted an extensive literature search to collect data from field studies in the primary and grey literature reporting concentrations of cyanotoxins in water and fish. Online searches through Web of Science, Google Scholar, and Academic Search Premier were conducted using relevant search terms. Key terms, "cyanotoxins" or "cyanobacteria toxins" and "fish", in combination with other words, such as "harmful algal bloom", "blue-green algae", "lake", "freshwater" and the names of several cyanotoxins most commonly reported in the scientific literature (microcystin, nodularin, cylindrospermopsin, anatoxin, saxitoxin, and beta-methylamino-L-alanine) were used to create a list of field studies measuring cyanotoxins in fish and fresh water concurrently. Truncation and wildcard symbols were used to expand the search results and allow variations in the format or spelling of different terms (for example, "microcystins" or "microcystin"). Search options were set to return results from all text associated with the source, including title, key words, the body of the article, and references. Research with paired observations of cyanotoxins in fresh water and fish were targeted and the search was limited to studies from lentic systems. Studies that did not provide water toxin concentrations but reported toxin concentrations in fish were also included for comparisons of toxin levels between tissue types and trophic level. The references of each study were thoroughly searched for additional sources.
From each study matching our search criteria, cyanotoxin data were gathered from text, tables, and figures, and when available, information on the field site and targeted species were documented. Cyanotoxin concentration values were extracted from figures using WebPlotDigitizer version 3.8 (http://arohatgi.info/WebPlotDigitizer). Non-detects or concentrations below the limit of detection were recorded as a concentration of zero. When values (e.g., fish length or mass and cyanotoxin concentrations) were presented as a range, the midpoint was used. For fish data, the species, capture method, body metrics (length, mass), tissue type collected, mass of each tissue analyzed, and number of individuals used to form a sample (i.e., pooled tissues from separate individuals versus tissues from a single fish) were noted. The methods used for identification and quantification of cyanotoxins in water and fish tissues were also documented. For study locations, information on trophic status of the system, morphology of the water body (surface area, depth) and geographic location were recorded. We found several studies that analyzed cyanotoxins in fish stocked in cage or net enclosures in lakes. Data from such studies were excluded. Studies that provided insufficient detail regarding sample collection, processing or analyses were also excluded.
