Methods copied from:

Levey, D., T. Caughlin, L. Brudvig, N. Haddad, E. Damschen, J. Tewksbury, and D. Evans. 2016. Disentangling fragmentation effects on herbivory in understory plants of longleaf pine savanna. Ecology 97(9): 2248-2258.

Study site and species:

We worked in a series of eight experimental landscapes (hereafter "experimental blocks") created to test the efficacy of habitat corridors (Tewksbury et al. 2002). The experimental blocks were located within the Savannah River Site (SRS), a National Environmental Research Park in Aiken and Barnwell counties, South Carolina. Each block was composed of five fragments that are maintained as open, longleaf pine savanna and surrounded by a matrix of mature pines (Pinus palustris and P. taeda). Within an experimental block are three fragment types-connected, winged, and rectangular- arranged with one fragment in the center and four "peripheral" fragments 150 m from each side of the center fragment (Fig. 1). Connected fragments were 100 x 100 m with a 150 x 25 m corridor of the same habitat joining them to another fragment. Winged and rectangular fragments were identical in area to each other and to a connected fragment plus its corridor (1.375 ha). Winged fragments were 100 x 100 m plus the area of two blind-_end corridors (75 x 25 m) extending from opposite sides and parallel to the nearest edge of the center fragment. Rectangular fragments were 100 x 137.5 m. The edge-_to--area ratios of winged and connected fragments (including corridor) were similar to each other and averaged 40% greater than the edge-_to-_area ratio of rectangular fragments (Weldon 2006). Experimental blocks included a buffer area of pine matrix habitat extending approximately 150 m from the outside edge of all peripheral fragments. Within experimental blocks, fragment type and orientation were randomized. Four blocks consisted of two connected fragments, two winged fragments, and one rectangular fragment. The other four blocks consisted of two connected fragments, one winged fragment, and two rectangular fragments. 

We emphasize that our landscapes are composed of open savanna habitat fragments surrounded by a dense pine plantation matrix. Therefore, when we refer to distance from edge in our experimental fragments, the reference point is in open savanna habitat and the distance is to the nearest forest. Longleaf pine savannas were historically the dominant ecosystem type, consisting of a highly diverse herbaceous understory with low numbers of scattered trees. Dense pine plantations are regionally common today, but were historically rare. 

Abiotic conditions differ greatly within fragments as a function of distance to edge but are similar among the different types of fragments. Specifically, daytime temperature 0.3 m above soil surface in mid-_summer (June and July) of two years (2008 and 2009) averaged approximately 32 C at 1 m from the nearest edge, 33.5 C at 10.5 m, 34.5 C at 20 m, and 35 C at 37 m (Evans et al. 2012). Temperature did not differ among fragment types, nor was there a significant interaction between fragment type and distance to nearest edge. Although we do not have comparable data on light and soil moisture, their spatial variation likely mirrors that of temperature (Chen et al. 1999). We expect light to increase and soil moisture to decrease with distance from edge, with neither greatly impacted by fragment shape. 

We selected nine species of understory plants, all native to longleaf pine savanna and most of management interest due to their rare and patchy distributions (Kilgo and Blake 2005). With few exceptions, all populations were restricted to our experimental fragments (i.e., individuals rarely occurred in the matrix) and were planted as founder populations by us (see below). Species were chosen to represent a wide variety of growth forms, leaf textures, and taxonomic affiliations-all factors we suspected might influence their susceptibility to herbivory and their response to edges and connectivity. Aristida beyrichiana, Sorghastrum secundum, and Anthaenantia villosa are perennial bunch grasses (Poaceae). Aristida has stiff, wire-_like leaves, whereas Sorghastrum and Anthaenantia have wider, more flexible leaves. (We use genus names throughout to refer to the species described here.) Carphephorus bellidifolius and Liatris earlei are perennial forbs (Asteraceae) with basal rosettes of broad, pliable leaves and sparse hairs. Phytolacca americana (Phytolaccaceae) and Solanum americanum (Solanaceae) are annual, upright forbs that grow quickly in open habitats and have broad, membranous leaves. Nolina georgiana (Liliaceae) is a perennial, basal-_leaved forb with flat grass-_like leaves and stature. Gaylussacia dumosa (Ericaceae) is a perennial, short-_statured shrub with relatively small, leathery leaves. 

To help identify potential patterns of herbivory among sets of species with similar growth forms, we categorized these species into four groups: grass and grass-_like (Aristida, Sorghastrum, Anthaenantia, Nolina), perennial forbs (Carphephorus, Liatris), annual forbs (Phytolacca, Solanum), and shrub (Gaylussacia). We grouped Nolina with the grasses, due to matching basal-_leaved growth forms and similar narrow, coriaceous, leaf morphology. We did not have a priori expectations of differences among these groups, and we recognize the limitations of any comparisons with such a small and taxonomically narrow set of species. 

All plants except Gaylussacia were planted as seedlings into the experimental landscapes in the growing seasons of 2007 and 2008. Gaylussacia was transplanted from nearby populations. For all other species, seeds were collected from naturally occurring populations in the southeastern United States and then propagated in greenhouse conditions until planting. By mixing seeds prior to germination, any maternal effects were randomly distributed across treatments. Solanum was replanted in 2008 and 2009, since individuals did not survive the winters. During establishment, water was provided whenever weekly rainfall failed to reach the growing season weekly mean for the region (2.5 cm). Individuals that died during establishment were replaced. 

One seedling of every species was transplanted into each of 16, 1 x 4 m plots in each of the 40 fragments (8 blocks x 5 fragments/block; N = 5,760 seedlings, total). In each fragment, plots were arranged in four transects of four plots each (Fig. 1). Transects originated at fragment corners and extended diagonally, at equal distance from the nearest edges, toward the center. Plots were positioned at 1, 15, 27, and 52 m from the patch corner along all transects, representing distances of approximately 1, 10, 19, and 36 m, respectively, from each of the two nearest edges. Within plots, seedlings were planted 0.5 m apart in a line perpendicular to and centered on the transect. The location of species along this line was randomized separately for each plot. Grasshoppers (Orthoptera) are major herbivores in the fragments, accounting for >99% of observed herbivory on at least one of our study species, Solanum americanum, and are frequently flushed from many other species when walking between plots (Evans et al. 2012, Hahn and Orrock 2015b). Common genera include Hippiscus, Melanoplus, Pardalophora, Psinidia, and Schistocerca, Trimerotropis; Melanoplus and Schistocerca are most abundant and both are mainly composed of dietary generalists (Orrock et al. 2011, Evans et al. 2012, Hahn and Orrock 2015b). Grasshopper abundance increases with distance to edge and is highest in rectangular fragments, presumably because rectangular fragments contain more area far from edge than winged and connected fragments (Evans et al. 2012). 

Herbivory and growth: 

In 2009, all plants were surveyed for herbivory three times: 30 May-13 June, 30 June-11 July, and 8-23 September, with the exception of Solanum, which was surveyed twice (27-31 August and 16-20 September) in only two of the transects in each fragment. On every plant, we counted the total number of leaves and all of the leaves with any sign of herbivory. Because the vast majority of herbivory was by insects that partially consumed leaves, assessment at the scale of individual leaves was appropriate. For individuals with more than 300 leaves, we extrapolated the total leaf number and number of leaves damaged by herbivores from a subsample of 100 leaves. To quantify growth, we recorded plant size by measuring maximum height, length (parallel to long axis of plot) and width (parallel to short axis of plot). Plant size was estimated by calculating volume (heightxlengthx width) and relative growth rate was determined by subtracting the log volume of a given plant in June-_July from its log volume in September. Results were qualitatively similar regardless of whether we used height, area (length x width), or volume as a metric of plant size (Appendix S1). We did not collect size data for Solanum and therefore excluded this species from analysis of growth.
