On each sampling date, we collected approximately 0.1 m-resolution depth profiles of temperature and oxygen with an 19plus 4 Hertz Conductivity, Temperature, and Depth (CTD) profiler (Seabird Electronics, Bellevue, Washington, USA) from the water’s surface to the sediments at the deepest site in the reservoir. We collected water to measure dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) concentrations in the epilimnion and hypolimnion weekly at 0.1 m and 9.0 m depth, respectively, at the deepest site in the reservoir. The samples were collected with a Van Dorn (Wildlife Supply Company, Yulee, Florida, USA), homogenized in a bucket, and syringe-filtered through a glass fiber 0.7 micrometer filter into an acid-washed bottle. The filtered samples were frozen until analysis on an organic carbon analyzer (OI Analytical 1010 Total Organic Carbon Analyzer with 1051 autosampler, College Station, TX) following protocol Standard Method 5310C (APHA 2012). We calculated the dissolved carbon dioxide concentration following Lewis and Wallace (1998).

To estimate organic carbon and dissolved carbon dioxide loading to the reservoir, we also collected weekly samples for DOC and DIC analysis at a gauged weir on the upstream tributary approximately 150 m above the reservoir and analyzed the samples as described above. Organic carbon deposition on the sediments was estimated by sampling duplicate sedimentation traps (KC Denmark A/S, Silkeborg, Denmark) deployed at 8 m depth every approximately 4 weeks. One of the replicate trap samples was used to calculate mass accumulation after vacuum filtration and drying at 40 C. The other replicate was analyzed for particulate organic carbon (POC) by dry combustion using a Vario MAX CNS Macro Elemental Analyzer (Elementar, Hanau, Germany). The flux of organic carbon deposition was determined by multiplying the POC concentration by the rate of particulate mass accumulation. 

Finally, we calculated the daily inflow volume of water entering Falling Creek Reservoir through the gauged weir. We measured the amount of water entering into the reservoir through the weir with an INW Aquistar PT2X pressure sensor (INW, Kirkland, Washington, USA), which recorded the weir water level and stream temperature every 15 minutes. The water level data were then used to calculate the daily inflow volume of water into the reservoir, following Gerling et al. (2014).

References:

APHA. 2012. American Public Health Association. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, 22th ed. Method 5310C. Total organic carbon (TOC): persulfate-ultraviolet or heated-persulfate oxidation method. Rice, E. W., R. B. Baird, A. D. Eaton, and L. S. Clesceri [eds.]. American Public Health Association, Washington, DC.

Gerling, A. B., R. G. Browne, P. A. Gantzer, M. H. Mobley, J. C. Little, and C. C. Carey. 2014. First report of the successful operation of a side stream supersaturation hypolimnetic oxygenation system in a eutrophic, shallow reservoir. Water Research 67: 129-143. DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2014.09.002

Lewis, E., and D. W. R. Wallace. 1998. Program developed for CO2 system calculations. ORNL/CDIAC-105. Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy, Oak Ridge, Tennessee.