We chose ten major journals that we expected to publish field experiments on seed and seedling predation. We examined issues of the American Journal of Botany, American Midland Naturalist, American Naturalist, Biotropica, Canadian Journal of Botany, Ecology, Journal of Ecology, Journal of Tropical Ecology, Oecologia, and Oikos published between 1970 and 1998 for appropriate articles. Internet searches were also conducted using online versions of the Science Citation Index and Biological Abstracts, searching for the terms seed or seedling and predation. This search led to a large number of articles that were then examined for suitability of inclusion in the meta‐analysis.

Criteria were devised a priori to avoid personal bias in selecting articles. Articles were included if all criteria applied to at least one experiment reported. For inclusion, the study had to be quantitative and the data reported in a usable form, allowing us to compute the number of seeds or seedlings surviving in each distance category and the number of seeds used in the test. Often, data were only reported in graphical form. To use these data, graphs were scanned with Deskscan II cx v 2.0 (Hewlett‐Packard Co. 1993) software and analyzed with the data‐grabbing software TechDig v1.1b (Jones 1995). Further, some experimental manipulation by the observer was required; experiments conducted with natural seedfall or naturally occurring seedlings were excluded. Studies had to report at least two contrasting conditions, either near/far from parent plant (distance), or two habitats with conspecific adults present in one habitat but generally not in the other (habitat). We also required studies to be conducted on native plants in their natural habitat and to use experimental designs that allowed predation on propagules by the full complement of native animals. This led us to reject data from portions of experiments that excluded groups of predators (insect or vertebrate exclosures) or only examined the effects of disease or pathogens on propagule survival.

Experimenters generally placed a known number of propagules in depots which were located either near or far from the parent plant. After a given amount of time had passed, the number of survivors was counted and recorded. The number of individuals consumed was then inferred through subtraction. Thus, the data from each study can be arranged in a 2×2 contingency table, with columns corresponding to distance (near or far), and rows corresponding to seed or seedling fate (survival or predation). For studies involving multiple distances, we compared the closest and furthest depots and for studies with repeated measurements, we used a collective measure, selecting the number of individuals surviving and consumed at the final census interval as the values for the contingency table. The closest (near) depots were usually within the canopy of the focal plant, while the far distances were as noted. To compare results across experiments we used an odds ratio (or relative odds) metric computed from the 2×2 contingency table which is the ratio of the odds of propagule survival when near the parent to the odds of propagule survival when far from the parent. 
