Landscape experiment: 

In 2000, we initiated a landscape experiment to test for connectivity effects with the presence of corridors at the Savannah River Site, a National Environmental Research Park in Aiken and Barnwell Counties, South Carolina, USA. The experiment consists of 10 replicate landscapes, each comprised of five open habitat patches created by clearing mature pine plantation forest, creating a strong contrast between the open focal patches and matrix of closed canopy forest. Eight landscapes were created prior to the 2000 growing season and two prior to the 2007 growing season. Of the original eight landscapes, two were discontinued following the 2007 growing season and one following the 2015 growing season. The remaining five landscapes initiated in 2000 and both landscapes initiated in 2007 continue through the end of this study.

Each landscape contains a center patch (100x100m, 1ha) surrounded by four peripheral patches that are each 150m from the center patch. The center patch is connected to one peripheral patch by a 150x25m corridor, while the other three peripheral patches are isolated from the center patch by plantation forest. Unconnected patches are equal in area to the connected peripheral patch plus its corridor (1.375 ha) and are either rectangular (100x137.5 m) or winged; winged patches have two 75x25 m projections from each side of a 100x100m patch equal in area of the corridor. The identity of peripheral patches (connected, rectangle, winged) was randomly assigned within each landscape, with one duplicate winged or rectangle patch in each landscape. This study design allows us to separate influences of corridors mediated through connectivity from the influence of corridors on patch shape (edge:area) effects, by comparing connected to winged patches (comparable edge:area, different connectivity) and winged to rectangle patches (comparable connectivity, different edge:area).

Through periodic prescribed fire and removal of encroaching hardwood trees we have restored patches to their historical ecosystem type: open canopy longleaf pine savanna. These are standard management practices in this system. Prescribed fires are implemented and controlled by our partners at the USDA Forest Service in a way that is consistent with the historical fire regime and how fire management typically occurs through conservation in longleaf pine savannas. Fires are ignited every two to three years during the dormant season (November - April) and allowed to burn across large burn blocks that incorporate all experimental patches for a given block, the surrounding matrix, and other surrounding forest. These are non-catastrophic surface fires, as most longleaf pine woodland species can readily resprout following burns. We have cut hardwood tree species with saws every three to four years and have used targeted herbicide applications to reduce woody plant encroachment in patches. These management practices allow the experimental patches to undergo succession toward mature longleaf pine woodland characterized by low density overstory longleaf pine trees and an understory dominated by perennial herbs and grasses, while maintaining the contrast between our experimental patches and surrounding pine plantation matrix over the long term.

Plant Community Occurrence Surveys:

To quantify plant species richness and rates of extinction and colonization within our experiment, we annually surveyed each habitat patch for all plant occurrences. We conducted surveys between May 15 and July 15, when most species in our system are visually identifiable, from 2001 through 2017 (except 2004) by systematically walking the area of each patch and compiling a list of all vascular plant species observed. Resulting estimates of species richness for each patch are from equal areas (1.375 ha). Taxonomy follows Radford et al. (1968) and Weakley (2015). In instances where identification was not possible to the species level based on visible characters during the time of sampling, species were merged to the most common species or to the genus level. In instances where identification was unknown, we removed their records from the dataset. Additionally, we do not include species that we have transplanted to our experimental landscapes. 

Dispersal Mode:

We assigned each plant species one of three primary dispersal modes, each which are distinctive classes of seed movement: wind, animal, or gravity. We first attemped to determine dispersal modes by searching the Kew Garden Seed Information Database (http://data. kew.org/sid/). If not found in that database, we then searched the primary literature with ISI Web of Science for primary literature that described dispersal for the species and/or genus. If not in the primary literature, we also used reliable plant natural history websites to cross-reference obtained information. All dispersal mode designations were independently reviewed by two plant ecologists within our plant ecology research team (E. Damschen, L. Brudvig, M. Burt, C. Warneke, Q. Sorenson). Any conflicting or missing dispersal mode labels were discussed and decided by this entire team and decided on based on morphological and field observations (~11% of species). Wind dispersal includes both wind and tumbling dispersal mechanisms. Animal dispersal included endozoochory and epizoochory by birds and mammals and myrmecochory by ants. Gravity dispersal included ballistic dispersal mechanisms and species lacking apparent morphology to assist dispersal. 

Longleaf Pine Species

We classified species as longleaf pine indicator species (i.e. longleaf pine species) if they met at least one of the following: 1) had been previously designated as longleaf pine upland species in published species lists for the Savannah River Site (Workman and McLeod 1990 , Kilgo and Blake 2005),  or 2) had been designated as an “indicator species” in eprevious analyses of longleaf pine savanna plant communities at the Savannah River Site (Turley et al. 2017) . 

Literature Cited

A. E. Radford, Manual of the Vascular Flora of the Carolinas [by] Albert E. Radford, Harry E. Ahles [and] C. Ritchie Bell (1968).

A. S. Weakley, Flora of the Carolinas, Virginia, Georgia and Surrounding Areas (University of North Carolina Herbarium, North Carolina Botanical Garden, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2015).
 
Kew, Seed Information Database Version 7.1: Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew (2017), (available at http://data. kew.org/sid/).

S. W. Workman, K. W. McLeod, “Vegetation of the Savannah River Site: major community types” (Savannah River Site National Environmental Research Park Program; Aiken, SC, 1990), (available at https://www.osti.gov/biblio/6877070).

J. C. Kilgo, J. I. Blake, Eds., Ecology and Management of a Forested Landscape: Fifty Years on the Savannah River Site (Island Press, Washington, D.C., 2005).

N. E. Turley, J. L. Orrock, J. A. Ledvina, L. A. Brudvig, Dispersal and establishment limitation slows plant community recovery in post-agricultural longleaf pine savannas. J. Appl. Ecol. 54, 1100–1109 (2017).
