Methods copied directly from:

Evans, D.M., D.J. Levey, and J.J. Tewksbury. 2013. Landscape Corridors Promote Long-Distance Seed Dispersal by Birds During Winter but Not During Summer at an Experimentally Fragmented Restoration Site. Ecological Restoration Vol. 31, No. 1.

Experimental Landscape Configuration: 

We conducted this study at the Savannah River Site (SRS) near New Ellenton, South Carolina. We worked in six experimental landscape replicates (blocks), created in 1999 and 2000 by clear-cutting habitat patches from mature pine plantation forest. The forest matrix of each landscape remains intact, but the patches have had hardwoods removed and have been burned four times since 1999 to promote longleaf pine savannah restoration. Each landscape is ca. 50 ha, including forested matrix area, and consists of five habitat patches: a central 100 x 100-m source patch surrounded by four peripheral patches equidistant (150 m) from the central patch (Figure 1a). One peripheral patch in each landscape is connected to the central patch by a corridor that is 25 m wide and 150 m long. All peripheral patches are equal in size to the area of the central patch (1 ha) plus the area of the corridor (0.375 ha). Therefore, each experimental landscape consists of 1 central patch, 1 connected peripheral patch, and 3 unconnected peripheral patches; all patches and corridors are predominantly savannah habitat within a matrix of mature pine forest. See Tewksbury and others (2002) for a more detailed description of the landscapes. Most native plants in the longleaf pine savannah patches in our experimental landscapes do not thrive or persist in the mature plantation pine forest matrix that surrounds the patches. Our experimental landscapes are similar to most fragmented landscapes for which corridors are proposed to conserve and restore habitat; the corridors are designed to connect patches of habitat suitable for particular ecological communities that are surrounded by an unsuitable matrix (Crooks and Sanjayan 2006). The configuration of the landscapes permits explicit tests of the function of corridors as conduits for long-distance seed dispersal, by comparing seed movement from the central patches to the peripheral (connected and unconnected) patches. For the purposes of this study, we define long-distance dispersal as >150 m. This threshold is similar to that used in other studies (Cain et al. 2000, Russo et al. 2006, Levey et al. 2008), and it is objectively linked to our experimental design; because a seed in our landscapes must travel at least 150 m to move from its patch of origin to a new patch, this distance represents non-local dispersal. 

Focal Plant Species: 

American black nightshade is an early successional herbaceous plant native to the southeastern United States. It is common in South Carolina but does not naturally occur in our experimental landscapes. Any American black nightshade seeds dispersed in the landscapes as part of this study must have originated from plants that we placed in the landscapes (see Planting Design below). At SRS, American black nightshade begins producing fruits in May, and plants will flower and fruit continuously until September (Evans, personal observation). Its ripe fruits are commonly consumed by a variety of bird species (Martin 1951, Tamboia et al. 1996, Carlo 2005). In good conditions, American black nightshade can grow >1 m tall and produce >100 fruits. Plants used for this study were grown in a greenhouse until they were flowering and/or fruiting and then were transplanted into the field. Planting Design, Seasonal Timing, and Numbers of Fruits Available to Birds We conducted two experiments, one in summer and one in winter. The summer experiment began on 9 May 2009, when we transplanted 40 large (ca. 1 m height) American black nightshade plants into the central patch in each landscape, with plants evenly interspersed in those patches (Figure 1b). Most plants were flowering when planted. Plants were in 1-L plastic pots filled with Sunshine  Mix #7 (Sun Gro Horticulture, British Columbia, Canada) potting soil. We buried the pots in the ground and watered plants as needed throughout the summer, usually three times per week. During summer, American black nightshade plants produced ripe fruits that were available to birds for approximately eight weeks. We counted ripe fruits in each landscape weekly and found that fruit production was synchronous in all landscapes. We observed the first ripe fruits in each landscape on 24 May. Plants in all landscapes produced the most ripe fruits between 7 and 14 June, when there were, on average, 2,932 ripe fruits per landscape. By 19 July, the number of ripe fruits in the landscapes had declined to landscapes for 8 wks, <5% of fruits remained in any landscape, and we removed all plants from the field.

Measuring Seed Dispersal: 

For both the summer and winter experiments, we installed 80 seed traps per landscape (16 traps per patch) on top of 3-m tall plastic poles (artificial perches, each 60 mm in diameter) arranged in a grid in each patch (following Levey and Sargent 2000; see Figure 1b). To build the traps, we used circular plastic baskets (25 cm in diameter and 10 cm deep) that were originally designed for hanging plants. We cut a 60-mm hole in the bottom of each trap, which permitted the traps to slide over the tops of the poles, so that each trap could be hung from the top of a pole and centered directly beneath it. These traps catch seeds when seed-consuming birds perch on top of the poles and defecate seeds into the traps. We glued a mesh screen in the bottom of each trap to keep seeds in the traps while permitting water to drain out, and we used wire hangers to fix the traps securely at the tops of the poles. Each trap hung ca. 0.25 m from the top of a pole and ca. 2.75 m above the ground. During both the summer and winter experiments, all traps remained in the landscapes for the full eight weeks that fruits were available to birds. At the end of each experiment, we removed all traps from the field and counted American black nightshade seeds in each trap. We used a dissecting microscope to confirm the identity of each seed. Because the seed traps were fixed ca. 2.75 m above the ground at the tops of plastic poles that were taller than almost all of the vegetation in the open habitat patches, any seeds deposited in the traps by birds were inaccessible to most ground-dwelling seed consumers. Ants conceivably could have climbed up the poles to consume seeds in the traps, and ants are abundant seed consumers in the habitat patches at SRS, but we never observed ants travelling up and down the poles during more than 1,000 person-hours in the field.
