Articles were selected by performing a literature search using the ISI Web of Science and Google search engines with the following keyword combinations: ECM and N, ECM and P, ECM and C, ECM and C allocation, ECM and cost:benefit, ECM and plant growth. We added references from personal reference archives that had been located through literature searches over several years, including searching literature cited in relevant papers. The reference lists of this first set of articles were then used to retrieve additional studies that matched our inclusion criteria by examining literature cited in the retrieved and selected papers. 

We surveyed literature for work where at least one of the following was quantified, in both ectomycorrhizal (ECM) plants and non-mycorrhizal (NM) controls: 1) belowground C allocation; 2) nitrogen (N) gain and plant biomass or relative growth rate (RGR); 3) belowground C allocation and plant biomass or RGR. We also looked for publications where nutrients other than N were quantified, together with plant growth. We used all studies where belowground C allocation was either 1) determined by tracer studies using 14C, or 2) indicated by the combined measurements of several parameters, such as CO2 assimilation, respiration, plant biomass, and in some cases, C metabolism enzyme activities and metabolite pools, or fungal respiration and/or biomass.

We used the log response ratio (lnR) as our measure of the effects of mycorrhization. This was calculated as the natural log (ln) of the means for the M plants divided by those of the NM ‘controls', that is, ln (M/NM). Mycorrhizal effects were calculated as the lnR for total plant biomass (or RGR), total N and P content, and for 14C tracer studies, the percent and total 14C allocation belowground. Mycorrhizal effects on belowground C allocation provide a snapshot rather than a cumulative picture of the carbon allocation. In studies where belowground C allocation was indicated by parameters other than 14C allocation, the mycorrhizal C sink was quantified by calculating the plants' C use efficiency, i.e. the plant biomass gained per C assimilated, calculated by dividing total plant weight by total plant CO2 assimilation. We assumed that plant respiration was similar in M and NM plants, and proportional to the plant size, and that major differences in C use efficiency would be due largely to losses of C to the fungal partner, and used in fungal biomass gain and fungal respiration.

We considered each different treatment combination of plant partner, fungal partner, N supply and harvest time as an independent result (each harvest is obviously done on different plants). In the cases where 14C tracing was used, the values used were from the final 14C measurement taken. In some cases, the non‐mycorrhizal ‘control' (NM group) was used in more than one comparison (e.g. compared with mycorrhizal plants with different fungal species). While this violates the assumption of independence of the effects combined in the meta‐analysis, the most straightforward alternative, discarding many of the cases is commonly considered a less desirable choice due to severe loss of information; in addition, there is no good way to choose what information to keep and what should be discarded. Violation of the assumption of independence could result in underestimation of confidence intervals, inflation of alpha values and artificially low significance levels; therefore, marginal significance should be treated cautiously.

Studies in which the fungus had access to nutrient compartments inaccessible to the plant, or where plants were subjected to stresses such as ozone, or hormone treatment were not included.
