The data in this file came from an experiment located at two University of Minnesota field stations; the Cloquet Forestry Center, Cloquet MN (382 m a.s.l., MAT, 4.8degC mean annual temperature, 783 mm mean annual precipitation) and the Hubachek Wilderness Research Center, Ely, MN,  (415 m a.s.l., MAT, 2.6deg C mean annual temperature, 726 mm mean annual precipitation). Reference numbers refer to references in Reich et al 2018 (Nature, in press).  Figures and References refer to those in the same paper. These methods are almost verbatim those provided in in Reich et al 2018 (Nature, in press).

At both sites, treatments were positioned in relatively open (recently cleared) overstory conditions. The overall experimental design was a 2 (site) x 2 (treatment) factorial, with six replicates of each for a total of 24 circular 3-meter diameter plots; with seedlings of 11 focal species planted in every plot.  Another 24 plots in understory conditions were not used for this study.  Treatments included two levels of simultaneous open-air plant and soil warming (ambient, + 3.4 degC); warming was accomplished with infrared lamp heaters and soil heating cables (dummy lamps and cables in the ambient plots). Warming was implemented from early spring to late fall each year in open-air plots (i.e. without chambers) via a feedback control that acts concurrently and independently at the plot scale to maintain a fixed temperature differential from ambient conditions above- and belowground. On average, we achieved 24-hour per day warming of +3.4 degC (about April-November) and midsummer midday (0900-1500 h during June-Sept) aboveground warming of +2.9 degC across the 2009 to 2011 growing season. Plant and soil temperature and soil moisture (0-20 cm depth) were measured continuously and recorded hourly in every plot throughout the study. Plant surface temperature was measured with infrared thermometers mounted above the plant canopy in every plot (IRR-P: Apogee Instruments Inc., Logan, UT, USA). Volumetric water content from 0 to 20 cm depth was measured in each plot using a 30 cm Campbell Scientific CS-616 probe inserted at 45deg. Volumetric water content (cm3 H2O/cm3 soil, VWC) was monitored hourly in all plots and corrected for soil textural and temperature differences using a Campbell Scientific method for user-specific calibration of water reflectometers (Model CS616). Both sites have well drained, coarse-textured upland soils.  In mid-continental boreal and temperate biomes, climate change will increase plant and air temperatures, and the associated increases in vapor pressure gradients (VPG) and evapotranspiration are likely to more than offset any increase in total atmospheric water vapor or precipitation, resulting in increased soil water deficits.

Eleven juveniles of each of 11 tree species were planted in 2008 into existing low shrub, herb, and fern vegetation in every plot (about 2,900 juveniles; average of about 3 years-old in 2009). The 11 species include six native broadleaf (Acer rubrum, A. saccharum, Betula papyrifera, Populus tremuloides, Quercus macrocarpa and Q. rubrum), one naturalized broadleaf (Rhamnus cathartica), and four native needle leaved (Abies balsamea, Picea glauca, Pinus banksiana, and Pinus strobus) species, all of which are present in the ecotonal region. Local ecotypes (collected between 46deg0’ and 48deg30’N latitude in northeastern Minnesota) of all species except Rhamnus were planted from material obtained from two Minnesota Department of Natural Resources nurseries in northern Minnesota. Rhamnus seedlings were transplants dug up from forests in north central Minnesota. 

In situ measures of light-saturated net photosynthesis (Anet) and leaf diffusive conductance (gs) were made using six Li-Cor 6400 portable photosynthesis systems (Li-Cor, Lincoln, NE). Simultaneous leaf temperature measurements were made for most species using the internal fine wire thermocouple located in the bottom of the 2x3cm Li-Cor leaf chamber (6400-02B LED) and directly touching the leaf during the measurement. However, for two conifers (balsam fir and spruce) we used a conifer chamber LED light source (6400-22L) and leaf temperature was calculated based on energy balance (for details see Li-Cor 6400XT manual) (Li-Cor, Lincoln, NE, USA). Leaf temperature measured in the cuvette and canopy surface temperature (measured independently with infrared thermometers, as described above) were strongly correlated. Cuvette leaf temperature was usually about 2degC higher than canopy temperature. This is largely because the cuvette and the enclosed leaf warmed up from being in the sun; additionally, leaves were selected for photosynthesis from upper canopy leaves in sunlit positions, whereas part of the plant canopy surface sensed by the infrared thermometers were often in partial shade. Measurements were made throughout the growing seasons (June to September) of 2009 through 2011. A total of 2,052 measurements of Anet and 1,964 of gs were made on a total of 1,338 individuals on 54 dates across species, treatments, sites, and time (1,991 and 1,903, respectively were made with matching soil VWC data). Individuals were three- to five-years old at the time of measurements. Measurements were made in morning or early afternoon (i.e. typically between 0830-1400 solar time). Not all species were measured each year due to the time-consuming nature of the measurements (five species were measured in all three years, four in two years, and two in one year). On every measurement date, any species included in that sampling was measured equally across contrasting warming treatments. Individuals to be sampled were chosen randomly from those not previously sampled.  Every measure was made on a unique leaf.  Over the three years, individual plants were usually measured once (n=839) or twice (n=338), but due to low survival in some species, other individuals were measured three (n=121), four (n=30), five (n=6), or six (n=4) times. Fully expanded, healthy upper canopy leaves were sampled from individuals in both ambient and +3.4 degC treatments at both sites. Light was maintained in the leaf chamber at saturating levels using the LED light source. Airflow was set at 500 micromol s-1 and CO2 reference concentrations were set at 400 micromol mol-1. 

Estimates of Vcmax25 from the one-point method and estimates of the percent stomatal limitation of Anet were also made. For data from other years where full A-Ci curves were measured, calculated Vcmax25 from the one-point method from single points of those A-Ci curves very closely matched (near 1:1 line, R2=0.96) the Vcmax25 values estimated from the entire curves, strongly supporting the appropriateness of the one-point method for our field measurements for this set of species. Percent stomatal limitation was taken as the percent reduction in Anet from the maximal rate estimated with no stomatal limitation (Agmax). Agmax was estimated (for each species in both treatments) in three ways; (i) based on calculations from A-Ci curves of nine of the eleven species made in later years of the study on a separate cohort of plants, (ii) based on the 95th percentile of Anet measurements from the current study, and (iii) based on the Agmax estimates from the A-Ci curves, adjusted to reflect realized Anet in the current study using the correlation of values from (i) and (ii). For method (i) we used the relationship between A-Ci curves and field 95th percentile Anet for 9 species to estimate Agmax for the two species without A-Ci curves. The overall patterns shown in each panel of the Extended Data Figure 4 are nearly identical using any of the three metrics. We used metric (iii) because it combined independent estimates of net photosynthetic rates from outside of this study, with maximal rates that better reflected realized rates in the study (and thus resulted in fewer values below zero for percent stomatal limitation). We recognize the impossibility of negative values for percent stomatal limitation, but retained them for statistical purposes.

A mixed model was used to compare light saturated net photosynthetic rates (Anet) and leaf diffusive conductance (gs) to treatment combinations, soil moisture conditions, VPG, and leaf temperature. Models included the following independent variables: species, warming treatment, VWC (on the day the gas exchange measurement was made), VPG, Tleaf and all interactions (up to four-way) among variables. Plot, block, and site were added to each model as a random effect. Models were also run separately for the subset of nine species measured in at least two years (Extended Data Table 4), for the five species measured in all three years (Extended Data Table 4), and for each species individually (Extended Data Table 3). Results were similar across these different models.  Moreover, comparisons across species on common dates were made in three different ways. First, we used coefficients from mixed models for each temperature treatment to estimate Anet across a range of VWC percentiles (Fig. 3); second we ran mixed models including species, treatments, and VWC bin classes to develop LSMEANs for all species x treatment x VWC bin combinations, and third we averaged raw species means for VWC bin classes across treatments. All three approaches resulted in similar output.

The three experimental years were typical of long-term climate (Extended Data Table 1); moreover, over the three years, the dates when leaf physiological measurements were made were well-distributed from early June to late September (between day of year [DOY] 162 to 269), and represented a similar range of frost-free temperatures and soil moisture as occurred across that growing season period in 2009-2011 (Extended Data Table 2).There was no evidence that mid-summer, which is warmer, was on average drier during these three particular years, nor did periods of low VWC occur in times of high VPG. As a result, there was no confounding of soil moisture deficits with leaf or air temperatures or VPG during our study; thus, physiological effects related to low soil moisture should have been largely independent of effects of air temperature (or VPG). 
